PART 7 Disorders of the Respiratory System

Section 1 Diagnosis of Respiratory Disorders
284 Approach to the Patient with Disease of the Respiratory System Bruce D. Levy

The majority of diseases of the respiratory system present with cough and/or dyspnea and fall into one of three major categories: (1) obstructive; (2) restrictive; and (3) vascular diseases. Obstructive
pathophysiology is most common and primarily results from airway diseases, such as asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), bronchiectasis, and bronchiolitis. Diseases resulting in restrictive pathophysiology include parenchymal lung diseases, abnormalities of the chest wall and pleura, and neuromuscular disease. Pulmonary embolism, pulmonary hypertension, and pulmonary venoocclusive disease are examples of disorders of the pulmonary vasculature. Although many specific diseases fall into these major categories, both infective and neoplastic processes can affect the respiratory system and result in myriad pathologic findings, including those listed in the three categories above.

Disorders can also be grouped according to gas exchange abnormalities, including hypoxemia, hypercarbia, or combined impairment; however, many respiratory disorders do not manifest as gas exchange abnormalities. As with the evaluation of most patients, the approach to a patient with a respiratory system disorder begins with a thorough history and a focused physical examination. Many patients will subsequently undergo pulmonary function testing, chest imaging, blood and sputum analysis, a variety of serologic or microbiologic studies, and diagnostic procedures, such as bronchoscopy. This stepwise approach is discussed in detail below.

■ HISTORY
Dyspnea and Cough The cardinal symptoms of respiratory disease are dyspnea and cough (Chaps. 37 and 38). Dyspnea has many causes, some of which are not predominantly due to lung pathology. The words a patient uses to describe shortness of breath can suggest certain etiologies for dyspnea. Patients with obstructive lung disease often complain of “chest tightness” or “inability to get a deep breath,” whereas patients with congestive heart failure more commonly report “air hunger” or a sense of suffocation. The tempo of onset and the duration of a patient’s dyspnea are likewise helpful in determining the etiology. Acute shortness of breath is usually associated with sudden physiologic changes, such as acute airway narrowing (e.g., laryngeal edema, bronchospasm, or mucus plugging), acute hypoxemia (e.g., pulmonary edema, pneumonia, or pulmonary embolism), or sudden changes in the work of breathing (e.g., pneumothorax). Patients with COPD and idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) experience a gradual progression of dyspnea on exertion, punctuated by acute exacerbations of shortness of breath. In contrast, most asthmatics do not have daily symptoms, but experience intermittent episodes of dyspnea, cough, and chest tightness that are usually associated with specific triggers, such as an upper respiratory tract infection or exposure to allergens. Specific questioning should focus on factors that incite dyspnea as well as on any intervention that helps resolve the patient’s shortness of breath. Asthma is commonly exacerbated by specific triggers, although this can also be true of COPD. Many patients with lung disease report dyspnea on exertion. Determining the degree of activity that results in shortness of breath gives the clinician a gauge of the patient’s degree of disability. Many patients adapt their level of activity to accommodate progressive limitation. For this reason, it is important, particularly in older patients, to delineate the activities in which they engage and how these activities have changed over time. Dyspnea on exertion is often an early symptom of underlying lung or heart disease and warrants a thorough evaluation.  For cough, the clinician should inquire about the duration of the cough, whether or not it is associated with sputum production, and any specific triggers that induce it. Acute cough productive of phlegm is often a symptom of infection of the respiratory system, including processes affecting the upper airway (e.g., sinusitis, tracheitis), the lower airways (e.g., bronchitis, bronchiectasis), and the lung parenchyma (e.g., pneumonia). Both the quantity and quality of the sputum, including whether it is blood-streaked or frankly bloody, should be determined. Hemoptysis warrants urgent evaluation as delineated in Chap. 39.
Chronic cough (defined as that persisting for >8 weeks) is commonly associated with obstructive lung diseases, particularly asthma, COPD, and chronic bronchiectasis, as well as “nonrespiratory” diseases, such as gastroesophageal reflux and postnasal drip. Diffuse parenchymal lung diseases, including IPF, frequently present as a persistent, nonproductive cough. All causes of cough are not respiratory in origin, and assessment should encompass a broad differential, including cardiac and gastrointestinal diseases as well as psychogenic causes. Additional Symptoms Patients with respiratory disease may report wheezing, which is suggestive of airways disease, particularly asthma. Hemoptysis can be a symptom of a variety of lung diseases, including infections of the respiratory tract, bronchogenic carcinoma, and pulmonary embolism. In addition, chest pain or discomfort can be respiratory in origin. As the lung parenchyma is not innervated with pain fibers, pain in the chest from respiratory disorders usually results from either diseases of the parietal pleura (e.g., pneumothorax) or pulmonary vascular diseases (e.g., pulmonary hypertension). As many diseases of the lung can result in strain on the right side of the heart, patients may also present with symptoms of cor pulmonale, including abdominal bloating or distention and
pedal edema (Chap. 257). Additional History A thorough social history is an essential component of the evaluation of patients with respiratory disease. All patients should be asked about current or previous cigarette smoking, as this exposure is associated with many diseases of the respiratory system, including COPD, bronchogenic lung cancer, and select parenchymal lung diseases (e.g., desquamative interstitial pneumonitis and pulmonary Langerhans cell histiocytosis). For most of these disorders, increased cigarette smoke exposure (i.e., cigarette pack-years) increases the risk of disease. E-cigarette or vaping use can lead to acute or subacute lung injury (i.e., E-cigarette or vaping use-associated lung injury [EVALI]). Secondhand smoke also increases risk for some respiratory disorders, so patients should also be asked about parents, spouses, or housemates who smoke. Possible inhalational exposures at work (e.g., asbestos, silica) or home (e.g., wood smoke, excrement from pet birds) should be explored (Chap. 289). Travel predisposes to certain infections of the respiratory tract, most notably tuberculosis. Potential exposure to fungi is increased in specific geographic regions or climates (e.g., Histoplasma capsulatum), so exposures to these regions should be determined. Associated symptoms of fever and chills should raise the
suspicion of infective etiologies, both pulmonary and systemic. A comprehensive review of systems may suggest rheumatologic or autoimmune disease presenting with respiratory tract manifestations. Questions should focus on joint pain or swelling, rashes, dry eyes, dry mouth, or constitutional symptoms. In addition, carcinomas from a variety of primary sources commonly metastasize to the lung and cause respiratory symptoms. Finally, therapy for other conditions, including both irradiation and medications, can result in diseases of the chest. Physical Examination The clinician’s suspicion of respiratory disease often begins with the patient’s vital signs. The respiratory rate is informative, whether elevated (tachypnea) or depressed (hypopnea). In addition, pulse oximetry should be measured, as many patients with respiratory disease have hypoxemia, either at rest or with exertion. The first step of the physical examination is inspection. Patients with respiratory disease may be in distress and using accessory muscles of respiration to breathe. Severe kyphoscoliosis can result in restrictive pathophysiology. Inability to complete a sentence in conversation is generally a sign of severe impairment and should
result in an expedited evaluation of the patient. Percussion of the chest is used to establish diaphragm excursion
and lung size. In the setting of decreased breath sounds, percussion is used to distinguish between pleural effusions (dull to percussion) and pneumothorax (hyper-resonant note). The role of palpation is limited in the respiratory examination. Palpation can demonstrate subcutaneous air in the setting of barotrauma. It can also be used as an adjunctive assessment to determine whether an area of decreased breath sounds is due to consolidation (increased tactile fremitus) or a pleural effusion (decreased tactile fremitus). To detect unilateral disorders of ventilation, the symmetry and degree of chest wall expansion can be assessed during a deep inspiration by placing one’s thumbs together at the midline over the lower posterior chest while grasping the lateral rib cage. The majority of the manifestations of respiratory disease present as abnormalities of auscultation. Wheezes are a manifestation of airway obstruction. While most commonly a sign of asthma, peribronchial edema in the setting of congestive heart failure can also result in diffuse wheezes, as can any other process that causes narrowing of small airways. Wheezes can be polyphonic, involving multiple different size airways (e.g., asthma), or monophonic, involving one size airway (e.g., bronchogenic carcinoma). For these reasons, clinicians must take care not to attribute all wheezing to
asthma. Rhonchi are a manifestation of obstruction of medium-sized airways, most often with secretions. In the acute setting, this manifestation may be a sign of viral or bacterial bronchitis. Chronic rhonchi suggest bronchiectasis or COPD. In contrast to expiratory wheezes and rhonchi, stridor is a high-pitched, focal inspiratory wheeze, usually heard over the neck as a manifestation of upper airway obstruction.
Crackles, or rales, are commonly a sign of alveolar disease. Processes that fill the alveoli with fluid may result in crackles, including pulmonary edema and pneumonia. Crackles in pulmonary edema are generally more prominent at the bases. Interestingly, diseases that result in fibrosis of the interstitium (e.g., IPF) also result in crackles that sound like Velcro being ripped apart. Although some clinicians make a distinction between “wet” and “dry” crackles, this distinction has not been shown to be a reliable way to differentiate among etiologies of respiratory disease. One way to help distinguish between crackles associated with alveolar fluid and those associated with interstitial fibrosis is to assess for egophony. Egophony is the auscultation of the sound “AH” instead of “EEE” when a patient phonates “EEE.” This change in note is due to abnormal sound transmission through consolidated parenchyma and is present in pneumonia but not in IPF. Similarly, areas of alveolar filling have increased whispered pectoriloquy as well as transmission of larger-airway sounds (i.e., bronchial breath sounds in a lung zone where vesicular breath sounds are expected). The lack or diminution of breath sounds can also help determine the etiology of respiratory disease. Patients with emphysema often have a quiet chest with diffusely decreased breath sounds. A pneumothorax or pleural effusion may present with an area of absent breath sounds. Other Systems Pedal edema, if symmetric, may suggest cor pulmonale; if asymmetric, it may be due to deep venous thrombosis and associated pulmonary embolism. Jugular venous distention may also be a sign of volume overload associated with right heart failure.
Pulsus paradoxus is an ominous sign in a patient with obstructive lung disease, as it is associated with significant negative intrathoracic (pleural) pressures required for ventilation and impending respiratory failure. As stated earlier, rheumatologic disease may manifest primarily as lung disease. Owing to this association, particular attention should be paid to joint and skin examination. Clubbing can be found in many lung diseases, including cystic fibrosis, IPF, and lung cancer. Cyanosis is seen in hypoxemic respiratory disorders that result in >5 g of deoxygenated hemoglobin/dL.

■ DIAGNOSTIC EVALUATION
The sequence of studies is dictated by the clinician’s differential diagnosis, as determined by the history and physical examination. Acute respiratory symptoms are often evaluated with multiple tests performed at the same time in order to diagnose any life-threatening diseases rapidly (e.g., pulmonary embolism or multilobar pneumonia). In contrast, chronic dyspnea and cough can be evaluated in a more protracted, stepwise fashion. Pulmonary Function Testing (See also Chap. 286) The initial pulmonary function test obtained is spirometry. This study is an effort-dependent test used to assess for obstructive pathophysiology as seen in asthma, COPD, and bronchiectasis (Table 284-1). A diminished-forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1)/forced vital capacity (FVC) (often defined as <70%) is diagnostic of airflow obstruction. In addition to measuring FEV1 and FVC, the clinician should examine the flow-volume loop (which is less effortdependent). A plateau of the inspiratory and expiratory curves suggests large-airway obstruction in extrathoracic and intrathoracic locations, respectively. Spirometry with symmetric decreases in FEV1 and FVC warrants further testing, including measurement of lung volumes and the diffusion capacity of the lung for carbon monoxide (DLCO). A total lung capacity <80% of the patient’s predicted value defines restrictive pathophysiology. Restriction can result from parenchymal disease, neuromuscular weakness, or chest wall or pleural diseases (Table 284-1). Restriction with impaired gas exchange, as indicated by a decreased DLCO, suggests parenchymal lung disease. Additional testing, such as measurements of maximal inspiratory and expiratory pressures, can help diagnose neuromuscular weakness. Normal spirometry, normal lung volumes, and a low DLCO should prompt further evaluation for pulmonary vascular disease. Arterial blood gas testing is often helpful in assessing respiratory disease. Hypoxemia, while usually apparent with pulse oximetry, can be further evaluated with the measurement of arterial PO2 and the calculation of an alveolar gas and arterial blood oxygen tension difference ([A–a]DO2). Patients with diseases that cause ventilation-perfusion mismatch or shunt physiology have an increased (A–a)DO2 at rest. Arterial blood gas testing also allows the measurement of arterial PCO2. Hypercarbia can accompany disorders of ventilation, as seen in severe airway obstruction (e.g.,COPD) or progressive restrictive physiology. Chest Imaging (See Chap. A12) Most patients with disease of the respiratory system undergo imaging of the chest as part of the initial evaluation. Clinicians should generally begin with ultrasound of the chest or a plain chest radiograph, preferably posterior-anterior and lateral films. Ultrasound is often readily available and can help rapidly diagnose pneumothorax, pleural effusion, and consolidation of lung parenchyma. Chest radiographs give additional detail and can reveal findings including opacities of the parenchyma, blunting of the costophrenic angles, mass lesions, and volume loss. Of note, many diseases of the respiratory system, particularly those of the airways and pulmonary vasculature, are associated with a normal chest radiograph. CT scan of the chest can also be useful to delineate parenchymal processes, pleural disease, masses or nodules, and large airways. If the test includes administration of intravenous contrast, the pulmonary vasculature can be assessed with particular utility for determination of pulmonary emboli. Intravenous contrast also allows lymph nodes to be examined in greater detail. When coupled with positron emission tomography (PET), lesions of the chest can be assessed for metabolic activity, helping differentiate between malignancy and scar.

285 Disturbances of Respiratory Function - Edward T. Naureckas, Julian Solway
The primary functions of the respiratory system—to oxygenate blood and eliminate carbon dioxide—require virtual contact between blood and fresh air, which facilitates diffusion of respiratory gases between blood and gas. This process occurs in the lung alveoli, where blood flowing through alveolar wall capillaries is separated from alveolar gas by an extremely thin membrane of flattened endothelial and epithelial cells, across which respiratory gases diffuse and equilibrate. Blood flow through the lung is unidirectional via a continuous vascular path along which venous blood absorbs oxygen from and loses CO2 to inspired gas. The path for airflow, in contrast, reaches a dead end at the alveolar walls; thus, the alveolar space must be ventilated tidally, with inflow of fresh gas and outflow of alveolar gas alternating periodically at the respiratory rate (RR). To provide an enormous alveolar surface area (typically 70 m2) for blood-gas diffusion within the modest volume of a thoracic cavity (typically 7 L), nature has distributed both blood flow and ventilation among millions of tiny alveoli through multigenerational branching of both pulmonary arteries and bronchial airways. Ideally, for the lung to be most efficient in exchanging gas, the fresh gas ventilation of a given alveolus must be matched to its perfusion. However, as a consequence of variations in tube lengths and calibers along these pathways as well as the effects of gravity, tidal pressure fluctuations, and anatomic constraints from the chest wall, the alveoli vary in their relative ventilations and perfusions even in health. For the respiratory system to succeed in oxygenating blood and eliminating CO2, it must be able to ventilate the lung tidally and thus to freshen alveolar gas; it must provide for perfusion of the individual alveolus in a manner proportional to its ventilation; and it must allow adequate diffusion of respiratory gases between alveolar gas and capillary blood. Furthermore, it must accommodate several-fold increases in the demand for oxygen uptake or CO2 elimination imposed by metabolic needs or acid-base derangement. Given these multiple requirements for normal operation, it is not surprising that many diseases disturb respiratory function. This chapter considers in some detail the physiologic determinants of lung ventilation and perfusion, elucidates how the matching distributions of these processes and rapid gas diffusion allow normal gas exchange, and discusses how common diseases derange these normal functions, thereby impairing gas exchange—or at least increasing the work required by the respiratory muscles or heart to maintain adequate respiratory function.

■ VENTILATION
It is useful to conceptualize the respiratory system as three independently functioning components: the lung, including its
airways; the neuromuscular system; and the chest wall, which includes everything that is not lung or active neuromuscular system. Accordingly, the mass of the respiratory muscles is part of the chest wall, while the force these muscles generate is part of the neuromuscular system; the abdomen (especially an obese abdomen) and the heart (especially an enlarged heart) are, for these purposes, part of the chest wall. Each of these three components has mechanical properties that relate to its enclosed volume (or—in the case of the neuromuscular system—the respiratory system volume at which it is operating) and to the rate of change of its volume (i.e., flow). The work of breathing required of the neuromuscular system is the sum of the work due to volume-related mechanical properties and the work from flow-related mechanical properties required to move air throughout the airways to create this volume change. Volume-Related Mechanical Properties—Statics Figure 285-1 shows the volume-related properties of each component of the respiratory system. Because of both surface tension at the air-liquid interface between alveolar wall lining fluid and alveolar gas and elastic recoil of the lung tissue itself, the lung requires a positive transmural pressure difference between alveolar gas and its pleural surface to stay inflated; this difference is called the elastic recoil pressure of the lung, and it increases with lung volume. The lung becomes rather stiff at high volumes, so that relatively small volume changes are accompanied by large changes in transpulmonary pressure; in contrast, the lung is compliant at lower volumes, including those at which tidal breathing normally occurs. At zero inflation pressure, even normal lungs retain some air in the alveoli. Because the small peripheral airways are tethered open by outward radial pull from inflated lung parenchyma attached to adventitia, as the lung deflates during exhalation, those small airways are pulled open progressively less, and eventually close, trapping some gas in the alveoli. This effect can be exaggerated with age and especially with obstructive airway diseases, resulting in gas trapping at quite large lung volumes.

The elastic behavior of the passive chest wall (i.e., in the absence of neuromuscular activation) differs markedly from that of the lung. Whereas the lung tends toward full deflation with no distending (transmural) pressure, the chest wall encloses a large volume when pleural pressure equals body surface (atmospheric) pressure. Furthermore, the chest wall is compliant at high enclosed volumes, readily expanding even further in response to increases in transmural pressure. The chest wall also remains compliant at small negative transmural pressures (i.e., when pleural pressure falls slightly below atmospheric pressure), but as the volume enclosed by the chest wall becomes quite small in response to large negative transmural pressures, the passive chest wall becomes stiff due to squeezing together of ribs and intercostal muscles, diaphragm stretch, displacement of abdominal contents, and straining of ligaments and bony articulations. Under normal circumstances, the lung and the passive chest wall enclose essentially the same volume, the only difference being the volumes of the pleural fluid and of the lung parenchyma (normally both quite small in the absence of disease). For this reason and because the lung and chest wall function in mechanical series, the pressure required to displace the passive respiratory system (lungs plus chest wall) at any volume is simply the sum of the elastic recoil pressure of the lungs and the transmural pressure across the chest wall. When plotted against respiratory system volume, this relationship assumes a sigmoid shape, exhibiting stiffness at high lung volumes (imparted by the lung), stiffness at low lung volumes (imparted by the chest wall or sometimes by airway closure), and compliance in the middle range of lung volumes where normal tidal breathing occurs. In addition, a passive resting point of the respiratory system is attained when alveolar gas pressure equals body surface pressure (i.e., when the transrespiratory system pressure is zero). At this volume (called the functional residual capacity [FRC]), the outward recoil of the chest wall is balanced exactly by the inward recoil of the lung. As these recoils are transmitted through the pleural fluid, the lung is pulled both outward and inward simultaneously at FRC, and thus, its pressure falls below atmospheric pressure (typically, −5 cmH2O). The normal passive respiratory system would equilibrate at the FRC and remain there were it not for the actions of the respiratory muscles. The inspiratory muscles act on the chest wall to generate the equivalent of positive pressure across the lungs and passive chest wall, while the expiratory muscles generate the equivalent of negative transrespiratory pressure. The maximal pressures these sets of muscles can generate vary with the lung volume at which they operate. This variation is due to length-tension relationships in striated muscle sarcomeres and to changes in mechanical advantage as the angles of insertion change with lung volume (Fig.285-1). Nonetheless, under normal conditions, the respiratory muscles are substantially “overpowered” for their roles and generate more than adequate force to drive the respiratory system to its stiffness extremes, as determined by the lung (total lung capacity [TLC]) or by chest wall or airway closure (residual volume [RV]); the airway closure always prevents the adult lung from emptying completely under normal circumstances. The excursion between full and minimal lung inflation is called vital capacity (VC; Fig. 285-2) and is readily seen to be the difference between volumes at two unrelated stiffness extremes—one determined by the lung (TLC) and the other by the chest wall or airways (RV). Thus, although VC is easy to measure (see below), it provides little information about the intrinsic properties of the respiratory system. As will become clear, it is much more useful for the clinician to consider TLC and RV individually.

Flow-Related Mechanical Properties—Dynamics 
The passive chest wall and active neuromuscular system both exhibit mechanical behaviors related to the rate of change of volume, but these behaviors become quantitatively important only at markedly supraphysiologic breathing frequencies (e.g., during high-frequency mechanical ventilation), and thus will not be addressed here. In  contrast, the dynamic airflow properties of the lung substantially affect its ability to ventilate and contribute importantly to the work of breathing, and these properties are often deranged by disease. Understanding dynamic airflow properties is, therefore, worthwhile. As with the flow of any fluid (gas or liquid) in any tube, maintenance of airflow within the pulmonary airways requires a pressure gradient that falls along the direction of flow, the magnitude of which is determined by the flow rate and the frictional resistance to flow. During quiet tidal breathing, the pressure gradients driving inspiratory or expiratory flow are small owing to the very low frictional resistance of normal pulmonary airways (Raw, normally <2 cmH2O/L/s). However, during rapid exhalation, another phenomenon reduces flow below that which would have been expected if frictional resistance were the only impediment to flow. This phenomenon is called dynamic airflow limitation, and it occurs because the bronchial airways through which air is exhaled are collapsible rather than rigid (Fig. 285-3). An important anatomic feature of the structure of the pulmonary airways is their tree like branching. While the individual airways in each successive generation, from most proximal (trachea) to most distal (respiratory bronchioles), are smaller than those of the parent generation, their number increases exponentially such that the summed cross-sectional area of the airways becomes very large toward the lung periphery. Because flow (volume/time) is constant along the airway tree, the velocity of airflow (flow/summed crosssectional area) is much greater in the central airways than in the peripheral airways. During exhalation, gas leaving the alveoli must, therefore, gain velocity as it proceeds toward the mouth. The energy required for this “convective” acceleration is drawn from the component of gas energy manifested as its local pressure, which reduces intraluminal gas pressure, airway transmural pressure, airway size (Fig. 285-3), and flow. This phenomenon is the Bernoulli effect, the same effect that keeps an airplane airborne, generating a lifting force by decreasing pressure above the curved upper surface of the wing due to acceleration of air flowing over the wing. If an individual attempts to exhale more forcefully, the local velocity increases further and reduces airway size further, resulting in no net increase in flow. Under these circumstances, flow has reached its  maximum possible value, or its flow limit. Lungs normally exhibit such dynamic airflow limitation. This limitation can be assessed by spirometry, in which an individual inhales fully to TLC and then forcibly exhales to RV. One useful spirometric measure is the volume of air exhaled during the forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1), as discussed later. Maximal expiratory flow at any lung volume is determined by gas density, airway cross-section and distensibility, elastic recoil pressure of the lung, and frictional pressure loss to the flow-limiting airway site. Under normal conditions, maximal expiratory flow falls with lung volume (Fig. 285-4), primarily because of the dependence of lung recoil pressure on lung volume (Fig. 2851). In pulmonary fibrosis, lung recoil pressure is increased at any lung volume, and thus the maximal expiratory flow is elevated when considered in relation to lung volume. Conversely, in emphysema, lung recoil pressure is reduced; this reduction is a principal mechanism by which maximal expiratory flows fall. Diseases that narrow the airway lumen at any transmural pressure (e.g., asthma or chronic bronchitis) or that cause excessive airway collapsibility (e.g., tracheomalacia) also reduce maximal expiratory flow.

The Bernoulli effect also applies during inspiration, but the more negative pleural pressures during inspiration lower the pressure outside of the airways, thereby increasing transmural pressure and promoting airway expansion. Thus, inspiratory airflow limitation seldom occurs due to diffuse pulmonary airway disease. Conversely, extrathoracic airway narrowing (e.g., due to a tracheal adenoma or post-tracheostomy stricture) can lead to inspiratory airflow limitation.

The Work of Breathing 
In health, the elastic (volume changerelated) and dynamic (flow-related) loads that must be overcome to ventilate the lungs at rest are small, and the work required of the respiratory muscles is minimal. However, the work of breathing can increase considerably due to a metabolic requirement for substantially increased ventilation, an abnormally increased mechanical load, or both. As discussed below, the rate of ventilation is primarily set by the need to eliminate carbon dioxide, and thus, ventilation increases during exercise (sometimes by >20-fold) and during metabolic acidosis as a compensatory response. Naturally, the work rate required to overcome the elasticity of the respiratory system increases with both the depth and the frequency of tidal breaths, while the work required to overcome the dynamic load increases with total ventilation. A modest increase of ventilation is most efficiently achieved by increasing tidal volume but not RR, which is the normal ventilatory response to lower-level exercise. At higher levels of exercise, deep breathing persists, but RR also increases. The work of breathing also increases when disease reduces the compliance of the respiratory system or increases the resistance to airflow. The former occurs commonly in diseases of the lung parenchyma (interstitial processes or fibrosis, alveolar filling diseases such as pulmonary edema or pneumonia, or substantial lung resection), and the latter occurs in obstructive airway diseases such as asthma, chronic bronchitis, emphysema, and cystic fibrosis. Furthermore, severe airflow obstruction can functionally reduce the compliance of the respiratory system by leading to dynamic hyperinflation. In this scenario, expiratory flows slowed by the obstructive airways disease may be insufficient to allow complete exhalation during the expiratory phase of tidal breathing; as a result, the “functional residual capacity (FRC)” from which the next breath is inhaled is greater than the static FRC. With repetition of incomplete exhalations of each tidal breath, the operating FRC becomes dynamically elevated, sometimes to a level that approaches TLC. At these high lung volumes, the respiratory system is much less compliant than at normal breathing volumes, and thus, the elastic work of each tidal breath is also increased. The dynamic pulmonary hyperinflation that accompanies severe airflow obstruction causes patients to sense difficulty in inhaling—even though the root cause of this pathophysiologic abnormality is expiratory airflow obstruction.

Adequacy of Ventilation  
As noted above, the respiratory control system that sets the rate of ventilation responds to chemical signals, including arterial CO2 and oxygen tensions and blood pH, and to  volitional needs, such as the need to inhale deeply before playing a long phrase on the trumpet. Disturbances in ventilation are discussed in Chap. 296. The focus of this chapter is on the relationship between ventilation of the lung and CO2 elimination. At the end of each tidal exhalation, the conducting airways are filled with alveolar gas that did not reach the mouth when expiratory flow stopped. During the ensuing inhalation, fresh gas immediately enters the airway tree at the mouth, but the gas first entering the alveoli at the start of inhalation is that same alveolar gas in the conducting airways that had just left the alveoli. Accordingly, fresh gas does not enter the alveoli until the volume of the conducting airways has been inspired. This volume is called the anatomic dead space (VD). Quiet breathing with tidal volumes smaller than the anatomic dead space introduces no fresh gas into the alveoli at all; only that part of the inspired tidal volume (VT) that is greater than the VD introduces fresh gas into the alveoli. The dead space can be further increased functionally if some of the inspired tidal volume is delivered to a part of the lung that receives no pulmonary blood flow and thus cannot contribute to gas exchange (e.g., the portion of the lung distal to a large pulmonary embolus). In this situation, exhaled minute ventilation (V̇E= VT × RR) includes a component of dead space ventilation (V̇D= VD × RR) and a component of fresh gas alveolar ventilation (V̇A= [VT − VD] × RR). CO2 elimination from the alveoli is equal to V̇A times the difference in CO2 fraction between inspired air (essentially zero) and alveolar gas (typically ∼5.6% after correction for humidification of inspired air, corresponding to 40 mmHg). In the steady state, the alveolar fraction of CO2 is equal to metabolic CO2 production divided by alveolar ventilation. Because, as discussed below, alveolar and arterial CO2 tensions are equal, and because the respiratory controller normally strives to maintain arterial PCO2 (PaCO2) at ∼40 mmHg, the adequacy of alveolar ventilation is reflected in Paco2 If the PaCO2 falls much below 40 mmHg, alveolar hyperventilation is present; if the PaCO2 exceeds 40 mmHg, alveolar hypoventilation is present. Ventilatory failure is characterized by extreme alveolar hypoventilation. As a consequence of oxygen uptake of alveolar gas into capillary blood, alveolar oxygen tension falls below that of inspired gas. The rate of oxygen uptake (determined by the body’s metabolic oxygen consumption) is related to the average rate of metabolic CO2 production, and their ratio—the “respiratory quotient” (R = V̇CO2/V̇O2) —depends largely on the fuel being metabolized. For a typical American diet, R is usually around 0.85. Together, these phenomena allow the estimation of alveolar oxygen tension, according to the following relationship, known as the alveolar gas equation: PaO2 = FIO2 × (Pbar − PH2O) − PaCO2/R The alveolar gas equation also highlights the influences of inspired oxygen fraction FIO2 barometric pressure (Pbar), and vapor pressure of water (PH2O = 47 mmHg at 37°C) in addition to alveolar ventilation (which sets PaCO2) in determining PaO2. An implication of the alveolar gas equation is that severe arterial hypoxemia rarely occurs as a pure consequence of alveolar hypoventilation at sea level while an individual is breathing air. The potential for alveolar hypoventilation to induce severe hypoxemia with otherwise normal lungs increases as Pbar falls with increasing altitude.

■ GAS EXCHANGE
Diffusion 
For oxygen to be delivered to the peripheral tissues, it must pass from alveolar gas into alveolar capillary blood by diffusing through alveolar membrane. The aggregate alveolar membrane ishighly optimized for this process, with a very large surface area and minimal thickness. Diffusion through the alveolar membrane is so efficient in the human lung that in most circumstances hemoglobin of a red blood cell becomes fully oxygen saturated by the time the cell has traveled just one-third the length of the alveolar capillary. Thus, the uptake of alveolar oxygen is ordinarily limited by the amount of blood transiting the alveolar capillaries rather than by the rapidity with which oxygen can diffuse across the membrane; consequently, oxygen uptake from the lung is said to be “perfusion limited” rather than diffusion limited. CO2 also equilibrates rapidly across the alveolar membrane. Therefore, the oxygen and CO2 tensions in capillary blood leaving a normal alveolus are essentially equal to those in alveolar gas. Only in rare circumstances (e.g., at high altitude or in high performance athletes exerting maximal effort) is oxygen uptake from normal lungs diffusion limited. Diffusion limitation can also occur in interstitial lung disease if substantially thickened alveolar walls remain perfused. 


Ventilation/Perfusion Heterogeneity 
As noted above, for gas exchange to be most efficient, ventilation to each individual alveolus (among the millions of alveoli) should match perfusion to its accompanying capillaries. Because of the differential effects of gravity on lung mechanics and blood flow throughout the lung and because of differences in airway and vascular architecture among various respiratory paths, there is minor ventilation/perfusion heterogeneity even in the normal lung; however, V̇/Q̇ heterogeneity can be particularly marked in disease. Two extreme examples are (1) ventilation of unperfused lung distal to a pulmonary embolus, in which ventilation of the physiologic dead space is “wasted” in the sense that it does not contribute to gas exchange; and (2) perfusion of nonventilated lung (a “shunt”), which allows venous blood to pass through the lung unaltered. When mixed with fully oxygenated blood leaving other well-ventilated lung units, shunted venous blood disproportionately lowers the mixed arterial PaO2 as a result of the nonlinear oxygen content versus PO2 relationship of hemoglobin. Furthermore, the resulting arterial hypoxemia is refractory to supplemental inspired oxygen. The reason is that (1) raising the inspired FIO2 has no effect on alveolar gas tensions in nonventilated alveoli and (2) while raising inspired FIO2 increases PaCO2 in ventilated alveoli, the oxygen content of blood exiting ventilated units increases only slightly, as hemoglobin will already have been nearly fully saturated and the solubility of oxygen in plasma is quite small.

A more common occurrence than the two extreme examples given above is a widening of the distribution of ventilation/perfusion ratios; such V̇/Q̇ heterogeneity is a common consequence of lung disease. In this circumstance, perfusion of relatively underventilated alveoli results in the incomplete oxygenation of exiting blood. When mixed with well-oxygenated blood leaving higher V̇/Q̇ regions, this partially reoxygenated blood disproportionately lowers arterial PaO2, although to a lesser extent than does a similar perfusion fraction of blood leaving regions of pure shunt. In addition, in contrast to shunt regions, inhalation of supplemental oxygen raises the PaO2 even in relatively underventilated low V̇/Q̇ regions, and so the arterial hypoxemia induced by V̇/Q̇ heterogeneity is typically responsive to oxygen therapy. In sum, arterial hypoxemia can be caused by substantial reduction of inspired oxygen tension, severe alveolar hypoventilation, perfusion of relatively underventilated (low V̇/Q̇) or completely unventilated (shunt) lung regions, and, in very unusual circumstances, limitation of gas diffusion.

■ PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Although many diseases injure the respiratory system, this system responds to injury in relatively few ways. For this reason, the pattern of physiologic abnormalities may or may not provide sufficient information by which to discriminate among conditions. Figure 285-6 lists abnormalities in pulmonary function testing that are typically found in a number of common respiratory disorders and highlights the simultaneous occurrence of multiple physiologic abnormalities. The coexistence of some of these respiratory disorders results in more complex superposition of these abnormalities. Methods to measure respiratory system function clinically are described later in this chapter.

Ventilatory Restriction due to Increased Elastic Recoil—
Example: Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis
Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis raises lung recoil at all lung volumes, thereby lowering TLC, FRC, and RV as well as forced vital capacity (FVC). Maximal expiratory flows are also reduced from normal values but are elevated when considered in relation to lung volumes. Increased flow occurs both because the increased lung recoil drives greater maximal flow at any lung volume and because airway diameters are relatively increased due to greater radially outward traction exerted on bronchi by the stiff lung parenchyma. For the same reason, airway resistance is also normal. Destruction of the pulmonary  capillaries by the fibrotic process results in a marked reduction in diffusing capacity (see below). Oxygenation is often severely reduced by persistent perfusion of alveolar units that are relatively underventilated due to fibrosis of nearby (and mechanically linked) lung due to those alveolar units already being stretched to their maximum volume with little further increase in volume with inspiration. The flow-volume loop (see below) looks like a miniature version of a normal loop but is shifted toward lower absolute lung volumes and displays maximal expiratory flows that are increased for any given volume over the normal tracing. 

Ventilatory Restriction due to Chest Wall Abnormality— 
Example: Moderate Obesity 
As the size of the average American continues to increase, this pattern may become the most common of pulmonary function abnormalities. In moderate obesity, the outward recoil of the chest wall is blunted by the weight of chest wall fat and the space occupied by intraabdominal fat. In this situation, preserved inward recoil of the lung overbalances the reduced outward recoil of the chest wall, and FRC falls. Because respiratory muscle strength and lung recoil remain normal, TLC is typically unchanged (although it may fall in massive obesity) and RV is normal (but may be reduced in massive obesity). Mild hypoxemia may be present due to perfusion of alveolar units that are poorly ventilated because of airway closure in dependent portions of the lung during breathing near the reduced FRC. Flows remain normal, as does the diffusion capacity of the lung for carbon monoxide DLCO unless obstructive sleep apnea (which often accompanies obesity) and associated chronic intermittent hypoxemia have induced pulmonary arterial hypertension, in which case DLCO may be low. 

Ventilatory Restriction due to Reduced Muscle Strength—
Example: Myasthenia Gravis 
In this circumstance, FRC remains normal, as both lung recoil and passive chest wall recoil are normal. However, TLC is low and RV is elevated because respiratory muscle strength is insufficient to push the passive respiratory system fully toward either volume extreme. Caught between the low TLC and the elevated RV, FVC and FEV1 are reduced as “innocent bystanders.” As airway size and lung vasculature are unaffected, both Raw and DLCO are normal. Oxygenation is normal unless weakness becomes so severe that the patient has insufficient strength to reopen collapsed alveoli during sighs, with resulting atelectasis.

Airflow Obstruction due to Decreased Airway Diameter—
Example: Acute Asthma 
During an episode of acute asthma, luminal narrowing due to smooth muscle constriction as well as inflammation and thickening within the small- and medium-sized bronchi raise frictional resistance and reduce airflow. “Scooping” of the flow-volume loop is caused by reduction of airflow, especially at lower lung volumes. Often, airflow obstruction can be reversed by inhalation of β2-adrenergic agonists acutely or by treatment with inhaled steroids chronically. TLC usually remains normal (although elevated TLC is sometimes seen in long-standing asthma), but FRC may be dynamically elevated. RV is often increased due to exaggerated airway closure at low lung volumes, and this elevation of RV reduces FVC. Because central airways are narrowed, Raw is usually elevated. Mild arterial hypoxemia is often present due to perfusion of relatively underventilated alveoli distal to obstructed airways (and is responsive to oxygen supplementation), but DLco is normal or mildly elevated.

Airflow Obstruction due to Decreased Elastic Recoil—Example:
Severe Emphysema 
Loss of lung elastic recoil in severe emphysema results in pulmonary hyperinflation, of which elevated TLC is the hallmark. FRC is more severely elevated due to both loss of lung elastic recoil and dynamic hyperinflation—the same phenomenon as auto PEEP (auto–positive end-expiratory pressure), which is the positive end-expiratory alveolar pressure that occurs when a new breath is initiated before the lung volume is allowed to return to FRC. RV is very severely elevated because of airway closure and because exhalation toward RV may take so long that RV cannot be reached before the patient must inhale again. Both FVC and FEV1 are markedly decreased, the former because of the severe elevation of RV and the latter because loss of lung elastic recoil reduces the pressure driving maximal expiratory flow and also reduces tethering open of small intrapulmonary airways. The flowvolume loop demonstrates marked scooping, with an initial transient spike of flow attributable largely to expulsion of air from collapsing central airways at the onset of forced exhalation. Otherwise, the central airways remain relatively unaffected, so Raw is normal in “pure” emphysema. Loss of alveolar surface and capillaries in the alveolar walls reduces DLco; however, because poorly ventilated emphysematous acini are also poorly perfused (due to loss of their capillaries), arterial hypoxemia usually is not seen at rest until emphysema becomes very severe. However, during exercise, PaO2 may fall precipitously if extensive destruction of the pulmonary vasculature prevents a sufficient increase in cardiac output and mixed venous oxygen content falls substantially. Under these circumstances, any venous admixture through low V̇/Q̇ units has a particularly marked effect in lowering mixed arterial oxygen tension.

■ FUNCTIONAL MEASUREMENTS
Measurement of Ventilatory Function • LUNG VOLUMES 
Figure 285-2 demonstrates a spirometry tracing in which the volume of air entering or exiting the lung is plotted over time. In a slow vital capacity maneuver, the patient inhales from FRC, fully inflating the lungs to TLC, and then exhales slowly to RV; VC, the difference between TLC and RV, represents the maximal excursion of the respiratory system. Spirometry discloses relative volume changes during these maneuvers but cannot reveal the absolute volumes at which they occur. To determine absolute lung volumes, two approaches are commonly used: inert gas dilution and body plethysmography. In the former, a known amount of a nonabsorbable inert gas (usually helium or neon) is inhaled in a single large breath or is rebreathed from a closed circuit; the inert gas is diluted by the gas resident in the lung at the time of inhalation, and its final concentration reveals the volume of resident gas contributing to the dilution. A drawback of this method is that regions of the lung that ventilate poorly (e.g., due to airflow obstruction) may not receive much inspired inert gas and so do not contribute to its dilution.

Therefore, inert gas dilution (especially in the single-breath method) often underestimates true lung volumes. In the second approach, FRC is determined by measuring the compressibility of gas within the chest, which is proportional to the volume of gas being compressed. The patient sits in a body plethysmograph (a chamber usually made of transparent plastic to minimize claustrophobia) and, at the end of a normal tidal breath (i.e., when lung volume is at FRC), is instructed to pant against a closed shutter, thus periodically compressing air within the lung slightly. Pressure fluctuations at the mouth and volume fluctuations within the body box (equal but opposite to those in the chest) are determined, and from these measurements, the thoracic gas volume is calculated by means of Boyle’s law. Once FRC is obtained, TLC and RV are calculated by adding the value for inspiratory capacity and subtracting the value for expiratory reserve volume, respectively (both values having been obtained during spirometry) (Fig. 285-2). The most important determinants of healthy individuals’ lung volumes are height, age, and sex, but there is considerable additional normal variation beyond that accounted for by these parameters. In addition, race influences lung volumes; on average, TLC values are ∼12% lower in African Americans and 6% lower in Asian Americans than in Caucasian Americans. In practice, a mean “normal” value is predicted by multivariate regression equations using height, age, and sex, and the patient’s value is divided by the predicted value (often with “race correction” applied) to determine “percent predicted.” For most measures of lung function, 85–115% of the predicted value can be normal; however, in health, the various lung volumes tend to scale together. For example, if one is “normal big” with a TLC 110% of the predicted value, all other lung volumes and spirometry values will also approximate 110% of their respective predicted values. This pattern is particularly helpful in evaluating airflow, as discussed below.

AIR FLOW 
As noted above, spirometry plays a key role in lung volume determination. Even more often, spirometry is used to measure airflow, which reflects the dynamic properties of the lung. During an FVC maneuver, the patient inhales to TLC and then exhales rapidly and forcefully to RV; this method ensures that flow limitation has been achieved, so that the precise effort made has little influence on actual flow. The total amount of air exhaled is the FVC, and the amount of air exhaled in the first second is the FEV1; the FEV1 is a flow rate, revealing volume change per time. Like lung volumes, an individual’s maximal expiratory flows should be compared with predicted values based on height, age, and sex. While the FEV1/FVC ratio is typically reduced in airflow obstruction, this condition can also reduce FVC by raising RV, sometimes rendering the FEV1/FVC ratio “artifactually normal” with the erroneous implication that airflow obstruction is absent. To circumvent this problem, it is useful to compare FEV1 as a fraction of its predicted value with TLC as a fraction of its predicted value. In health, the results are usually similar. In contrast, even an FEV1 value that is 95% of its predicted value may actually be relatively low if TLC is 110% of its respective predicted value. In this case, airflow obstruction may be present, despite the “normal” value for FEV1. The relationships among volume, flow, and time during spirometry are best displayed in two plots—the spirogram (volume vs time) and the flow-volume loop (flow vs volume). In conditions that cause airflow obstruction, the site of obstruction is sometimes correlated with the shape of the flow-volume loop. In diseases that cause lower airway obstruction, such as asthma and emphysema, flows decrease more rapidly with declining lung volumes, leading to a characteristic scooping of the flow-volume loop. In contrast, fixed upper-airway obstruction typically leads to inspiratory and/or expiratory flow plateaus.

AIRWAYS RESISTANCE 
The total resistance of the pulmonary and upper airways is measured in the same body plethysmograph used to measure FRC. The patient is asked once again to pant, but this time against a closed and then opened shutter. Panting against the closed shutter reveals the thoracic gas volume as described above. When the shutter is opened, flow is directed to and from the body box, so that volume fluctuations in the box reveal the extent of thoracic gas compression, which in turn reveals the pressure  fluctuations driving flow. Simultaneous measurement of flow allows the calculation of lung resistance (as flow divided by pressure). In health, Raw is very low (<2 cmH2O/L/s), and half of the detected resistance resides within the upper airway. In the lung, most resistance originates in the central airways. For this reason, airways resistance measurement tends to be insensitive to peripheral airflow obstruction.

RESPIRATORY MUSCLE STRENGTH 
To measure respiratory muscle strength, the patient is instructed to exhale or inhale with maximal effort against a closed shutter while pressure is monitored at the mouth. Pressures >±60 cmH2O at FRC are considered adequate and make it unlikely that respiratory muscle weakness accounts for any other resting ventilatory dysfunction that is identified.

Measurement of Gas Exchange • DIFFUSING CAPACITY (DLCO) 
This test uses a small (and safe) amount of carbon monoxide (CO) to measure gas exchange across the alveolar membrane during a 10-s breath hold. CO in exhaled breath is analyzed to determine the quantity of CO crossing the alveolar membrane and combining with hemoglobin in red blood cells. This “single-breath diffusing capacity” (DLCO) value increases with the surface area available for diffusion and the amount of hemoglobin within the capillaries, and it varies inversely with alveolar membrane thickness. Thus, DLCO decreases in diseases that thicken or destroy alveolar membranes (e.g., pulmonary fibrosis, emphysema), curtail the pulmonary vasculature (e.g., pulmonary hypertension), or reduce alveolar capillary hemoglobin (e.g., anemia). Single-breath diffusing capacity may be elevated in acute congestive heart failure, asthma, polycythemia, and pulmonary hemorrhage.

Arterial Blood Gases 
The effectiveness of gas exchange can be assessed by measuring the partial pressures of oxygen and CO2 in a sample of blood obtained by arterial puncture. The oxygen content of blood (CaO2) depends on arterial saturation (%O2Sat), which is set by PaO2 pH, and PaCO2 according to the oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve. CaO2 can also be measured by oximetry (see below):
CaO2 (mL/dL) = 1.39 (mL/dL) × [hemoglobin] (g) × % O2 Sat + 0.003(mL/dL/mmHg) × Pao2 (mmHg)

If hemoglobin saturation alone needs to be determined, this task can be accomplished noninvasively with pulse oximetry.


286 Diagnostic Procedures in Respiratory Disease George R. Washko, Hilary J. Goldberg, Majid Shafiq

Diagnostic procedures in respiratory disease encompass a wide array of invasive and noninvasive modalities. Methods for acquiring diagnostic specimens are described in this chapter, as are the various imaging modalities at hand. Pulmonary function tests and measurements of gas exchange are described in Chap. 284.

BEDSIDE PLEURAL PROCEDURES
■ THORACENTESIS
Thoracentesis, also known as pleurocentesis, refers to percutaneous aspiration of fluid from the pleural space. The right and left pleural
spaces do not normally communicate with each other, and either can
be directly accessed between the thoracic ribs. The current standard
of care entails using point-of-care ultrasonography to mark the site of
needle puncture; this reduces the risks of “dry tap” as well as
complications such as pneumothorax. Beside palliation of symptoms
associated with pleural effusion (most commonly dyspnea),
thoracentesis may be performed for diagnostic purposes. The range
of hematologic, biochemical, microbiologic, and cytologic pleural fluid
studies has largely remained unchanged over the past few decades,
as has the widespread adoption of Light’s criteria for distinguishing
exudates from transudates that were described in 1972. However,
newer assays such as mesothelin-1 testing for neoplastic diseases
(chiefly mesothelioma) have also become available more recently.
More details on pleural fluid testing are described in Chap. 294.
■ CLOSED PLEURAL BIOPSY
Closed pleural biopsy involves percutaneous sampling of the parietal
pleural lining. This procedure can be performed either “blindly”
(typically with an Abrams needle) or by using imaging guidance such
as CT or ultrasound. Closed pleural biopsy without ultrasound
guidance is highly sensitive for pleural tuberculosis, owing to the
diffuse pleural involvement that is typically seen in those cases.
Image-guided closed pleural biopsy is most helpful in case of
focal pleural abnormalities such as pleural nodules, which are
virtually pathognomonic of malignant involvement. Limited studies
have shown high diagnostic yields of around 80–90% with this
modality, but patient selection is key as the diagnostic performance
may be considerably lower in the absence of a specific pleural
abnormality that could be visualized. Between CT and ultrasound
imaging, only ultrasound is typically performed in real-time during the
act of obtaining the biopsy.

THORACIC SURGICAL PROCEDURES
■ THORACOSCOPY AND THORACOTOMY
Thoracoscopy and thoracotomy encompass a spectrum of surgical
procedures that involve accessing and operating within the pleural
space, either via one or more small entry ports using thoracoscopic
tools or via larger incisions as in thoracotomy (Fig. 286-1).
Thoracoscopy varies in its scope considerably. An interventional
pulmonologist typically performs a pleuroscopy (also known as
medical thoracoscopy) and accesses the pleural space through a
single port for parietal pleural biopsy or for limited therapeutic
purposes such as minor lysis of adhesions, thoracoscopic
pleurodesis, or indwelling pleural catheter placement. This procedure
can usually be performed safely under conscious sedation. On the
other hand, video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) and
robotic-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (RATS) represent more
invasive procedures but with more controlled environments entailing
general anesthesia with single-lung ventilation, creation of multiple
entry ports, and several additional diagnostic and therapeutic
possibilities including, but not limited to, lung biopsy, lymph node
sampling, lobectomy, decortication, and creation of a pericardial
window. Open thoracotomy uses wider incisions and more
conventional surgical techniques for performing all of the above as
well as additional tasks such as creation of a Clagett window for
chronic bronchopleural fistula with empyema.

■ MEDIASTINOSCOPY AND MEDIASTINOTOMY
Surgical access to the mediastinum, either through a small port
(mediastinoscopy) or a wider incision (mediastinotomy), enables
diagnostic sampling of mediastinal structures such as mediastinal
lymph nodes as part of lung cancer staging. With the advent of
endoscopic needle-based techniques (see below), surgery is no
longer considered the first-line option for diagnostic lymph node
sampling but is recommended in cases of negative needle-based
sampling where suspicion for malignant nodal involvement remains
sufficiently high.

BRONCHOSCOPY
Bronchoscopy, which entails passing a tube with a lighted camera
inside the lower respiratory tract, includes flexible and rigid
bronchoscopy (termed after the physical properties of each
bronchoscope). Flexible bronchoscopy is by far the more commonly
used form and enables access to more distal parts of the respiratory
tract. The rigid bronchoscope, although limited to the central airways,
has the added advantage of providing a secure airway for ventilation;
artificial breaths can then be administered through the scope itself as
part of a closed circuit or through open jet ventilation. The rigid
bronchoscope also provides a conduit for diagnostic or therapeutic
instruments to be passed freely, rather than through the relatively
constrained working channel of a flexible bronchoscope. When
bronchoscopy is limited to diagnostic indications, the rigid
bronchoscope is seldom used except on occasion as a
precautionary measure for anticipated severe bleeding where having
a more secure airway might be particularly advantageous (e.g., in
transbronchial cryobiopsy). Different types of diagnostic
bronchoscopic procedures are described below.

Bronchoalveolar Lavage 
Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) is the gold
standard method for obtaining respiratory secretions for hematologic,
biochemical, microbiological, and/or cytologic analyses. It avoids the
risk of salivary contamination, which may be seen in a sputum
specimen, and is particularly useful when sputum cannot be
obtained or when sampling of a specific pulmonary lobe or segment
is desired. After wedging the bronchoscope in a distal airway in order
to prevent fluid escape around the scope, sterile saline or distilled
water is instilled through the scope’s working channel (typically in
one to three aliquots of approximately 50 mL each). Immediately
thereafter, suction is applied to aspirate as much of the fluid as
possible. This allows sampling of distal airways and lung
parenchyma—areas not directly viewable or accessible. If there is
concern for alveolar hemorrhage, serial BALs from the same site
may show rising red blood cell counts and even visibly bloodier
returns with subsequent lavages.

Brushing and Endobronchial Biopsy
Bronchoscopic brushing is a minimally invasive sampling technique that can be used to sample
the mucosal biofilm for microbiologic analyses as well as the
bronchial epithelial layer for cytologic analyses. Endobronchial
biopsy allows sampling of abnormal bronchial mucosa and
submucosa for histopathologic analysis (as may be indicated in
cases of endobronchial amyloidosis or sarcoidosis, for example).
Among cigarette smokers with one or more lung nodules and a
nondiagnostic bronchoscopy, bronchial brushings can be used with a
commercially available classifier that estimates lung cancer
probability based on a gene expression signature. Patients with
intermediate pretest probability who end up with low posttest
probability can more confidently opt for imaging surveillance, thus
avoiding further invasive testing and related complications.

Transbronchial Biopsy Including Cryobiopsy 
Transbronchial biopsy involves removing a piece of alveolated lung tissue by
passing a sampling tool into the alveolar space. The most commonly
employed biopsy tool is flexible forceps, typically 2.0 mm or 2.8 mm
in caliber. When a specific pulmonary lesion such as a lung nodule is
being biopsied, various imaging and navigation tools (described
below) may be used to help guide the site of forceps biopsy. When
random sampling of the lung parenchyma is desired, e.g., to assess
for posttransplant lung rejection, either fluoroscopic guidance or
tactile feedback is commonly used to position the forceps in the
subpleural lung parenchyma. Limited data point to three biopsy
samples being adequate for optimizing sensitivity in case of
malignant lung nodules. On the other hand, at least five distinct
pieces of alveolated lung tissue are needed for formal diagnosis of
acute cellular rejection among lung transplant recipients per current
recommendations. An increasingly popular biopsy tool is the
cryoprobe, a flexible catheter with a blunt tip that delivers liquid
nitrogen or carbon dioxide over a few seconds to freeze a portion of
lung parenchyma and make it adhere to the probe itself. Before the
tissue can thaw and detach, the probe is pulled back (typically along
with the bronchoscope itself), and a frozen piece of lung tissue is
removed alongside. Cryobiopsy has a higher diagnostic yield than
forceps biopsy for diffuse parenchymal illnesses such as idiopathic
pulmonary fibrosis but comes with a higher risk of major bleeding
and pneumothorax.

Transbronchial Needle Aspiration 
Transbronchial needle aspiration (TBNA) involves using a hollow-bore needle for obtaining
aspirated specimens. This may be accompanied by suction or simply
rely on capillary action, with data not pointing to suction impacting
diagnostic sensitivity. TBNA has diagnostic sensitivity superior to that
of transbronchial biopsy for malignant peripheral nodules. This
makes intuitive sense given that the lesion may lie extraluminally and
require traversing the airway wall, which only the needle may be able
to accomplish. Furthermore, combining TBNA with conventional
transbronchial biopsy appears to increase pooled diagnostic
sensitivity.

Endobronchial Ultrasound-Guided Transbronchial Needle Aspiration 
Endobronchial ultrasound (EBUS) and EBUS-guided
transbronchial needle aspiration (EBUS-TBNA) represent a major
advance in diagnostic bronchoscopy over the turn of the twentieth
century, largely replacing surgical methods for lymph node sampling.
EBUS-TBNA involves using a specialized flexible bronchoscope that
simultaneously operates a video camera and a convex ultrasound
probe (which is installed at its distal end). Under real-time
ultrasonographic visualization, the aspiration needle is inserted
through the airway wall into the mediastinal target and the aspirate is
sent for microbiologic or cytologic analyses as indicated (Fig. 286-2).
Newer variants of this technique involve the use of core needles or
mini-forceps, providing tissue specimens rather than aspirates that
can be sent for histopathologic analysis. EBUS-TBNA has a
sensitivity of approximately 90% for epithelial malignancies and
approximately 70% for lymphoma (higher for detecting cases of
lymphoma recurrence than for de novo lymphoma). For sarcoidosis,
estimates point to a sensitivity of at least 80% (higher if combined
with endobronchial and transbronchial biopsies). EBUS-TBNA has
been shown to provide adequate amounts of material to provide
ancillary testing in cases of malignancy, such as immunostaining or
genetic testing. A related needle-based technique, also using
ultrasound guidance, involves sampling mediastinal structures
through the esophagus, which can be a useful adjunct to EBUSTBNA as it may provide better access to certain mediastinal lymphnode stations. The combined sensitivity of these two techniques is
slightly higher compared to either one alone. Esophageal sampling
can be accomplished either by inserting the same EBUS
bronchoscope through the esophagus or by using the standard
endoscope used by gastroenterologists for endoscopic ultrasound
(EUS).


At many centers, EBUS-TBNA is accompanied by rapid on-site
cytologic evaluation (ROSE), wherein a portion of the aspirated
specimen is immediately examined by a cytotechnologist or
pathologist using rapid staining. This rapid assessment, while often
inadequate for a definitive final diagnosis, can be helpful in
establishing adequacy of sampled material by providing the
bronchoscopist with real-time feedback on whether additional
sampling is advisable.

The optimal way to process samples obtained via EBUS-TBNA is
unknown. Some centers practice the tissue coagulum clot method, in
which multiple aspirates are emptied onto a single piece of filter
paper to form a clot that can help with preparation of a cell block.
Other centers simply use the residue from spun specimens for this
purpose. There is no conclusive evidence that one technique is
superior to the other, but this question has not been well studied to
date.

Guided Peripheral Bronchoscopy 
Guided peripheral bronchoscopy involves the use of advanced tools to aid with one or
more of three tasks involved in successful bronchoscopic sampling
of peripherally located lesions, such as lung nodules (see below).
Various tools are available to help the bronchoscopist accomplish
these tasks (Fig. 286-3).


(A) Navigating to the appropriate lobe/segment/subsegment:
Electromagnetic navigational bronchoscopy (which involves
GPS-like feedback as the bronchoscope is advanced toward the
target) and virtual bronchoscopy (which overlays live endoscopic
images onto a CT-derived virtual bronchoscopic map) can help
with successful navigation through the airways. Shape-sensing
technology, used as part of one robotic bronchoscopy platform
(see below), also aims to achieve the same purpose.
(B) The aforementioned technologies can also help localize a lesion,
although they are limited by relying on previously acquired CT
images that may or may not accurately represent precisely where
the lesion is currently located in a three-dimensional space.
Radial EBUS uses a thin ultrasound-tipped catheter that can be
passed through the bronchoscope’s working channel all the way
to the lung periphery. This provides real-time images of
structures beyond airway walls. A concentric image of the target,
indicating a lesion with the airway going through its center, is
associated with a high diagnostic yield. Alternatively, fluoroscopic
imaging can be used to recalibrate the precise target location on
navigational bronchoscopic platforms, potentially improving
localization as well. Cone-beam CT, which is a distilled version of
CT imaging that has been used intra-procedurally in multiple
other fields such as interventional radiology, can be used for
confirmation of optimal tool-in-lesion (with the patient undergoing
a breath hold) prior to sampling.
(C) The tools available for peripheral sampling include biopsy
forceps, brushes, and aspiration needles as described above,
with TBNA having the highest diagnostic sensitivity for discrete
malignant lesions. Evidence for use of cryobiopsy for sampling
discrete lesions in the lung periphery is currently limited. Recent
innovations also include steerable sampling tools, which hold
promise for more optimal sampling of the target lesion.

Robotic Bronchoscopy 
In 2018, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved two robotic bronchoscopy platforms
for commercial use. These platforms offer improved bronchoscope
stability and reach, but whether navigation, target localization, and
adequacy of sampling are superior to other techniques is less
certain. Early data on diagnostic yields are encouraging, but
multicenter prospective data are not yet available.

MEDICAL IMAGING
Imaging has revolutionized the practice of medicine. Technologies
such as x-ray, CT, MRI, and positron emission tomography (PET)
can provide noninvasive assessments of alveolar perfusion, the
metabolic activity of a lung nodule, the bronchovascular source of
hemoptysis, or the earliest disease-related changes in parenchymal
structure. Given the breadth of advances in respiratory system
imaging and increasingly specialized applications across diseases,
the following section is organized by technology. The final part of this
section is dedicated to deep learning and the role it is increasingly
playing in medical image interpretation.

■ CHEST X-RAY
The field of medical imaging can be traced back to work done by
Wilhelm Roentgen in the 1890s. Roentgen noted that after
connecting a cathode ray tube to a power supply, material in his lab
would fluoresce even if the emission of visible light from the tube
was blocked. He quickly deduced the presence of additional invisible
“x-rays” and subsequently observed that their passage through solid
material was attenuated in proportion to the material’s density. Within
weeks of its discovery, x-ray technology was being widely leveraged
to guide surgical exploration and the extraction of foreign objects
such as shrapnel from the battlefield. Chest x-ray (CXR) has since
become the foundation of clinical practice for respiratory medicine
and is a widely available technology even in resource-limited
settings.
The most commonly used CXR images for respiratory medicine
are the posteroanterior (PA) and lateral films in the outpatient setting
and anteroposterior (AP) films for those studies obtained at the
bedside. These are 2-dimensional representations of 3-dimensional
structures and the differing views can be used to examine
superimposed structures (for example, a parenchymal opacity in the
retrocardiac space). The contours of the chest wall, the silhouette of
the heart, great vessels, and mediastinum, as well as the
appearance of the parenchyma and bronchovascular bundle are all
used to detect and classify disease as well as monitor its
progression or response to therapeutic intervention. An example of a
normal PA and lateral CXR is provided in Fig. 286-4.

In this image of the normal lung, many of the smaller structures
such as the lymphatics and distal airways are beyond the ability of
conventional x-ray technology to resolve. Larger structures such as
the pulmonary vasculature may also be indistinct because of body
position and the redistribution of blood flow to more gravitationally
dependent regions. Diseases involving these structures may
enhance or obscure their appearance. An example of these diseases
is congestive heart failure where the lymphatics become engorged
(Kerley B lines), the nondependent vasculature more prominent
(cephalization), and the outer boundaries of the bronchial walls
blurred (bronchial cuffing). Each of these findings must be clinically
contextualized and while a thickened interstitium may be due to
hydrostatic pulmonary edema, it may also be indicative of interstitial
lung disease or carcinomatosis. CXR can also be used to
discriminate pulmonary and extra-pulmonary disease and because
of that it is an excellent initial diagnostic for nonspecific symptoms.
An elevated hemidiaphragm, fibrosis of the mediastinum, or
hyperlucency of the lung parenchyma all reflect processes that
cause dyspnea, but their treatment and prognosis differ markedly.

■ COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
CT was introduced to clinical care in the 1980s and quickly became
one of the most heavily leveraged modalities for medical imaging.
While CXR provides one or two views of the thorax from which an
experienced clinician must disambiguate overlying structures, CT
provides spatially resolved reconstructions of all structures in the
thorax. The acquisition of a CT scan involves the same basic
process as an x-ray with a patient placed between a source of
photons and a detector, but the image reconstruction and advanced
analytics that can be applied to those images differ markedly. The
passage of photons through the body is impeded in proportion to
tissue density. This absorption or attenuation of photon passage is
measured in Hounsfield units (HU) and clinical CT scanners are
regularly calibrated to a standard scale with water having an HU of 0
and air –1000 HU. The broad range of tissue densities (reflected as
attenuation values) in the thorax and the limited human ability to
visually discriminate between two structures of similar densities are
addressed by modifying the image display. A window width and level
(the range and center of the range of HU values to display) is
selected to optimize viewing structures of interest. For example, lung
windows are optimized for visual inspection of the low-density lung
parenchyma and all of the surrounding higher-density structures
appear white, whereas the mediastinal windows are optimized to
view the higher-density structures and anything of lower tissue
density such as the lung parenchyma appears black. This does not
change the HU values of the voxels (3-dimensional pixels) in the
image, just their presentation for visual inspection.
The visual interpretation of thoracic CT is based upon the
appearance of the secondary pulmonary lobule. This structure is a
fundamental subunit of the lung consisting of a central airway and
pulmonary artery, parenchyma, and then surrounding interstitium
with the lymphatics and pulmonary veins (Fig. 286-5).

Processes affecting the small airways such as respiratory
bronchiolitis may appear as centrilobular nodules. Parenchymal
diseases such as emphysema may begin by effacing the centroid of
the lobule (CLE: centrilobular emphysema), the periphery of the
lobule (PSE: paraseptal emphysema), or diffusely across the lobule
(PLE: panlobular emphysema). Pathology of the lymphatics or
interstitium (interstitial lung disease, ILD) results in beading and/or
thickening of the interlobular septa. Examples of many of these
processes are provided in Chaps. 292 and 293.

The diagnostic information provided by the appearance of the
secondary pulmonary lobule is further augmented by the distribution
of these patterns of injury across the lung. Whereas CLE tends to
first appear in the upper lung zones, PLE has a predilection to be
basilar predominant. Interstitial thickening in the apices is more likely
to be nonspecific interstitial pneumonitis (NSIP) while a basal and
dependent predominant distribution of that same process is more
consistent with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF).
Finally, morphology of the central airways and vessels can be
used to diagnose disease and estimate its severity. Bronchiectatic
dilation of the airways may be cylindrical and predominantly in the
lower lobes as is seen in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD), cystic dilation in the upper lobes (cystic fibrosis), or there
may be a focal nonspecific dilation of an airway due to prior infection.
Pathologic dilation of the airways may also be due to disease of the
surrounding parenchyma. Because of the mechanical
interdependence of the bronchial tree and parenchyma, conditions
that reduce lung compliance may result in traction bronchiectasis.
This may be a local process or more diffuse depending on the
distribution of the underlying parenchymal disease, and likely
provides further insight into disease severity.
The caliber of the central pulmonary arterial (PA) trunk proximal
to its first bifurcation is directly related to pulmonary arterial pressure.
A measure of >3 cm is suggestive of the presence of elevated
pulmonary vascular pressures and more recent studies have
demonstrated that an increased ratio of the PA diameter to the
diameter of the adjacent aorta (PA/A) provides a metric of disease
severity and in the case of chronic respiratory diseases such as
COPD is prognostic for both acute respiratory exacerbations and
death. Assessment of the intraparenchymal pulmonary vasculature
is typically augmented through the intravenous infusion or bolus of
iodinated contrast. This bolus and subsequent image acquisition
may be timed to visualize passage of contrast through the pulmonary
arteries to enable detection of thromboembolic disease, which
appears as dark filling voids in otherwise bright white vessels.
It must be noted that the acquisition of CXRs and thoracic CT
scans involves exposing the patient to ionizing radiation. Several
studies have estimated the excess numbers of cancer due to CT
scanning and extensive efforts have been made by both CT
manufacturers and clinicians to reduce the radiation dose to the
lowest possible amount that does not jeopardize image quality and
interpretability.

■ MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING
MRI is based upon the behavior of protons in a magnetic field. A
strong magnetic field is applied to align the protons and then a pulse
of radiofrequency current is then applied to the subject. This perturbs
the protons and the speed at which they subsequently realign differs
based upon the properties of the tissues within the region of interest.
While this technique provides exquisite imaging data for the chest
wall or solid organs such as the brain or heart, the abundance of air
in the lung creates an artifact that impairs direct assessment of the
parenchyma. For this reason, MRI of the lung leverages intravenous
contrast agents such as gadolinium and is increasingly exploring the
use of inhaled agents such as hyperpolarized noble gas. These
respective agents enable in vivo assessments of organ perfusion
and detailed measures of the morphology of the distal airspaces. An
example of noble gas–enhanced MRI is shown in Fig. 286-6. The
inhaled agent is 3He and because it is proton rich, it can be used to
examine lung ventilation visually and objectively. Regions of the lung
that are poorly ventilated due to disease of the airways or distal
airspaces have low concentrations of 3He and appear as dark
regions in an otherwise bright blue organ.

While an MRI may have a longer acquisition time than CT, and
the geometry of the equipment often leads to a sense of
claustrophobia, it does not involve the administration of ionizing
radiation. This makes it a modality of choice in the pediatric
population or clinical situations where repeated assessments are
required.

■ POSITRON EMISSION TOMOGRAPHY
PET generates an image based upon the aggregation of
radiolabeled tracers. The most common agent used for these
purposes is [18F]-fluoro-2-deoxyglucose (FDG). This radiolabeled
glucose analogue is administered intravenously and is taken up by
cells in direct proportion to their metabolic activity. In the clinical
setting, it is most commonly used for the discrimination of benign
and malignant lung nodules, as well as lung cancer staging. Given
the relatively low resolution of PET, co-registration with CT is
common and the aligned imaging modalities allow the reader to
determine the structural source of heightened metabolic activity.
There is increasing interest in the use of PET imaging in the
biomedical community. These applications are largely still confined
to research but advances in areas such as in vivo assessments of
vascular biology in acute and chronic disease have been impressive.
■ ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE/DEEP LEARNING
The final aspect to thoracic imaging that must be discussed is the
growing field of artificial intelligence and deep learning applied to
image analysis. Classic machine learning approaches to medical
image interpretation involve the development of advanced algorithms
to detect structures of interest, segment their boundaries, and then
extract metrics related to size, shape, texture, etc. The massive
increase in processing capacity afforded by graphical processing
units (GPUs), the increasing availability of large amounts of data,
and the wide dissemination of open-source software libraries
allowing developers to create powerful work environments has led to
explosive growth in the utilization of deep learning for image
analytics. Some of the first medical applications of deep learning
were in the field of dermatology and, more recently, this advanced
form of pattern recognition has been reported to excel at the
discrimination of benign and malignant lung nodules in thoracic CT
scan. The breadth of application of these tools continues to expand
to include image navigation and feature detection, biomarker
development, and direct prediction of clinical outcomes. An example
of deep learning–enabled segmentation of the heart and pulmonary
vasculature from noncontrast enhanced noncardiac gated CT scan is
shown in Fig. 286-7.

TRANSTHORACIC NEEDLE ASPIRATION
Radiologically guided needle biopsy has served as a long-standing
mechanism for evaluation of parenchymal lung lesions, both
malignant and infectious. In the setting of published guidelines
recommending low-dose screening CT scan for lung malignancy in
high-risk patients and with evolving guidelines for monitoring and
assessment of incidental lung lesions arising in this setting,
radiologically guided sampling of lung lesions has become an
increasingly important mechanism to address parenchymal lung
abnormalities concerning for cancer. Moreover, as novel immune
modulators and biologic agents are increasingly utilized for the
management of systemic disease and transplantation, effective
interventions are becoming progressively more important in
assessing for potential pulmonary infections arising as complications
of immune suppression. Transthoracic needle aspiration (TTNA)
remains one important arm in the assessment of these pulmonary
complications.
TTNA can be accomplished with a variety of complementary
imaging mechanisms, including under fluoroscopic, CT, ultrasound,
or MRI guidance. CT is currently the most common imaging modality
used to assess parenchymal lung lesions, with sensitivity and
specificity reported to be >90%. Sensitivity of CT-guided TTNA is
increased in more peripheral lesions. Transthoracic ultrasound has
the advantages of a low complication rate in the setting of fine
needle aspiration (FNA) and portability, allowing for more logistical
simplicity in the setting of lung lesion assessment. In a prospective
study of ultrasound-guided percutaneous FNA compared with CTguided FNA, diagnostic rates were comparable between the two
groups, with shorter procedure time associated with ultrasound
guidance, numerical suggestion of decreased complication rate
using ultrasound guidance, and lower costs associated with
ultrasound guidance. Use of elastography to better characterize lung
lesions has also been proposed in the context of ultrasound, though
additional diagnostic yield has not yet been proven. Color Doppler
ultrasonographic imaging has been demonstrated to have a high
sensitivity and specificity and a low complication rate in another
study. Electromagnetic guidance, unlike CT imaging, can be used in
combination with endobronchial ultrasound and or navigational
bronchoscopy in the operative setting, theoretically allowing for a
multimodal approach that could increase diagnostic yield and allow
for a combined staging procedure. Electromagnetic TTNA alone has
demonstrated an 83% diagnostic yield in a pilot study, with an
increase to 87% when combined with navigational bronchoscopy.
Conflicting data are available regarding the diagnostic superiority of
TTNA compared with alternative biopsy modalities such as
endobronchial ultrasound for diagnosis of lung lesions, and results
may depend on center experience.
Transthoracic sampling can be obtained using FNA or core
needle biopsy. In one retrospective study, FNA was found to have an
inferior diagnostic rate, compared with core needle sampling, as well
as lower specificity. In this study, a method involving two FNA passes
was compared to core needle sampling with six cores obtained from
a single pass. No significant differences in complication rates were
noted. In another retrospective study, in which procedure was
determined by operator preferences, core needle aspirate samples
were more likely to provide sufficient material for molecular testing
than FNA. A systematic review of these techniques concluded that
insufficient evidence was available to support a difference between
FNA and core needle biopsy in diagnostic efficiency, though core
needle biopsy may be more specific in diagnosing benign lung
lesions. Given the negative predictive value estimate of 70%,
negative results from TTNA are less reliable than positive results and
should not be considered definitive to eliminate the concern for
malignancy. Further assessment is needed to directly compare
imaging modalities for TTNA guidance and to compare TTNA with
other diagnostic modalities to determine the optimal choice of
procedure in particular settings. Choice of procedure should be
considered in the context of the size and location of the lesion, the
experience of the center and operator, and patient-specific factors.
In regards to the safety of TTNA, in a retrospective study from
2015, the presence of mild to moderate pulmonary hypertension in
patients did not increase complication rates in the setting of TTNA.
The complication rates noted in this report were substantial,
however, with hemorrhage occurring in one-third to one-quarter of
patients, and pneumothorax in 17–28%. The majority of
pneumothoraces did not require chest tube placement. Other
complications included hemoptysis and hemothorax, though these
were uncommon. These complication rates are consistent with those
reported in other studies. In a meta-analysis of complication rates of
CT-guided TTNA, complication rates were higher with core needle
aspirates than FNA (38.8% [95% CI 34.3–43.5%] vs 24% [95% CI
18.2–30.8%]). The majority of these complications were minor. Risk
factors for complications with FNA included smaller nodule diameter,
larger needle diameter, and increased traversed lung parenchyma.
No clear risk factors were noted for complications after core needle
biopsies in this publication. More generally, the risks of TTNA
increase for more centrally located lesions and those residing in
close proximity to intrathoracic vasculature.
Despite the outstanding questions regarding the optimal
approach for TTNA, this modality has been shown to be effective in
cancer diagnosis in the thorax. Adenocarcinoma has become the
most prevalent parenchymal lung malignancy in reported studies,
and also the most common malignant diagnosis found on TTNA of
the lung. TTNA can also be effective in diagnosing less common
tumors of the lung, both malignant and benign, including squamous
and small cell carcinomas, lymphomas, and others, as well as in
assessing tumors of the mediastinum. The diagnostic utility of TTNA
is consistent across solid, subsolid, and partially calcified lung
nodules. Immunocytochemistry markers can be utilized in TTNA
samples to assist with diagnosis, prognosis, and prediction of
response to therapy, and samples should be preserved whenever
possible to allow for these studies, if needed. RNA extraction has
also proven feasible in the setting of a single FNA sample, which
could be instrumental in gene expression profiling, though this has
thus far only been successfully accomplished in a research context.
The utility of TTNA in diagnosing pulmonary infections is variable
in published literature. Some publications have reported that TTNA
establishes a diagnosis of infection in 60–70% of cases, with a
particularly high yield in the setting of Aspergillus infections. TTNA
has also been shown to be particularly effective in the diagnosis of
pulmonary tuberculosis, though a wide variety of infections have
been diagnosed using this method. The presence of necrosis in lung
lesions makes establishing an infectious diagnosis more likely using
TTNA. Numerous staining techniques are available to assist with
infectious diagnoses, and immunohistochemistry can also aid in the
diagnosis of infection. Cytology should be correlated with
histopathology and culture results, when available. Metagenomics
using next-generation sequencing for detection of infection is
evolving but requires further study. TTNA has also been useful in
identifying granulomatous inflammation, which can provide
supportive evidence of a granulomatous parenchymal lung disease
in the appropriate clinical setting.
In summary, TTNA is an important element of diagnostic
algorithms in the setting of lung nodules and masses, particularly
when concern for malignancy is not high enough to warrant
immediate excision, when the patient is not a surgical candidate, or
the lesion or disease is not amenable to surgical resection. Further
study is needed, however, to better understand the role of TTNA and
other diagnostic modalities in the evaluation of parenchymal lung
lesions.

MISCELLANEOUS TESTING
■ SPUTUM TESTING
Sputum microscopy and culture are commonly utilized to diagnose
respiratory tract infections and identify the causative organisms. In
patients with productive cough the sampling is simple and
noninvasive, however, subject to patient technique and the potential
for oropharyngeal and/or upper respiratory tract contamination. In
those who are not expectorating, sputum induction can be
considered using provocative nebulization with saline. Numerous
studies have attempted to define criteria for reliability and
reproducibility of sputum samples. The majority include quantification
of number of epithelial cells and white blood cells per low power
field, and many assess the ratio of the two for adequacy of sampling.
None has been confirmed as superior in establishing the reliability of
sampling to reflect lower respiratory tract growth. The quality of the
sputum sample directly impacts the diagnostic reliability in the setting
of bacterial pneumonia. Growth of Mycobaterium tuberculosis,
Legionella, or pneumocystis should raise concern for infection, even
in the setting of a poor sample. Endotracheal aspirates have not
been demonstrated to be clearly superior to expectorated sputum in
terms of diagnostic reliability, but such sampling may be required if
spontaneous coughing is nonproductive and induced sputum is not
feasible or successful.

As in the context of infection, sputum cytologic analysis has been
utilized to assist in the diagnosis of malignancy, mainly because it
can be obtained noninvasively. While sputum cytology demonstrating
malignant cells is highly specific for a diagnosis of lung malignancy,
its sensitivity has been reported at <40%. A systematic review of
screening methods demonstrated no added benefit from sputum
cytology when combined with CXR to screen for lung cancer.
Advanced molecular techniques such as polymerase chain reaction,
DNA methylation markers, micro-RNA assessment, and tumorrelated protein analysis have been proposed in sputum assessment
for diagnostic purposes and risk stratification. At present, however,
sputum cytology is recommended only when more invasive
techniques cannot be pursued, such as in patients with prohibitive
comorbidities or in resource-limited settings.
■ EXHALED BREATH CONDENSATE
Exhaled breath condensate includes gaseous, liquid, and watersoluble components, with numerous biomarker types and collection
system varieties developed over time. Validation standards for many
components are still being determined. Exhaled nitric oxide is the
most highly validated of the biomarkers identified in exhaled breath
condensate. The fraction of exhaled nitric oxide (FeNO) has been
demonstrated in higher concentrations in exhaled breath condensate
of patients with asthma than in healthy individuals, and has been
shown in some studies to correlate with the presence of eosinophils
in the sputum and blood and with response to inhaled
corticosteroids, though data are conflicting. For example, in a
systematic review and meta-analysis, FeNO elevation increased the
odds of having asthma in both children above the age of 5 years and
adults. In another systematic review of FeNO utilization in the
management of adults with asthma, the assessment was helpful in
the management of severe exacerbations but had no significant
impact on overall exacerbations or inhaled corticosteroid use.
Moreover, evidence suggests that tailoring of asthma therapy based
on sputum eosinophil levels was effective in decreasing asthma
exacerbations, but tailoring of therapy based on FeNO was not
beneficial in improving outcomes, and insufficient evidence was
observed to advocate the use of either sputum analysis or FeNO in
clinical practice. FeNO has also been shown to be influenced by
ethnicity, and appropriate reference standards for different ethnic
groups have yet to be established. While FeNO has been proposed
as a potential clinical guide to management, its use has not been
incorporated into all guideline recommendations, and it has not been
formally approved for clinical use.
■ SWEAT TESTING
Assessment of chloride concentration in sweat using pilocarpine
iontopheresis, or sweat testing, remains a key element in the
diagnostic framework of cystic fibrosis (CF). This method utilizes
pilocarpine to stimulate sweat production. As patients with CF suffer
from alterations to the sodium chloride ion channel, measurement of
electrolytes in their secretions such as sweat reveals elevated
chloride concentrations, amongst other abnormalities. This testing
has been considered the gold standard in the diagnosis of CF due to
its functional nature, its relative noninvasiveness, the establishment
of validated standards for its performance, and its ability to
discriminate between healthy individuals and those with CF at a
chloride concentration of ≥60 mmol/L. The likelihood of a diagnosis
of CF at a concentration of <40 mmol/L has been observed to be
low, and an indeterminate range was defined as 40–59 mmol/L,
which could be consistent with the disease if genetic and clinical
manifestations were supportive.
While functional testing such as sweat chloride testing remains
an essential component of diagnostic algorithms in CF, the evolution
of genetic analysis has led to identification of an extensive array of
genetic mutations associated with varied phenotypic impacts in this
disease. In this context, the indeterminate range of chloride
concentrations of 40–59 mmol/L on sweat test analysis was found to
inadequately identify milder or more heterogenous forms of the
disease associated with newly identified genetic mutations. As a
result, the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation provided updated guidance for
the interpretation of sweat test results, with a decreased lower
threshold to define an intermediate range of chloride concentration
(changed from 40–50 mmol/L to 30–50 mmol/L), which could be
consistent with the diagnosis of CF in the appropriate genetic and
clinical context. In a subsequent analysis, utilization of the new
guidance was found to enhance the probability of identifying patients
with CF without increasing the false-positive diagnosis rate in the
population. Sweat testing is a critical component of the CF diagnostic
algorithm but should be interpreted in the context of clinical
manifestations of disease and correlated with genetic testing in those
suspected of the diagnosis.
■ ALLERGY TESTING
Allergy testing is often considered in the assessment of
environmental exposures, including seasonal allergens, food
allergens, and drug allergens. In the case of drug allergens in
particular, drug reactions are often reported based on remote history
and are often unconfirmed. The hesitancy to re-expose patients with
an unconfirmed drug allergy can lead to limited options for treatment,
to delay in treatment, and to utilization of treatments with more
extended spectrum, potentially influencing the resistance patterns of
these agents. Drug reactions can be mediated by IgE (immediate
type reactions, type I), IgG or IgM (type II), immune complex
reactions (type III), and delayed-type hypersensitivity reactions
mediated by cellular immune mechanisms (type IV).
Skin testing, including patch testing and/or delayed intradermal
testing, is available to test exposure to particular allergens and
determine reactivity. These tests have been shown to aid in clinical
phenotyping of type I reactions and potentially in type IV reactions,
though their role in type IV assessment remains more controversial.
In the context of suspected type I reactions, patch testing is more
cost effective and may be as effective as intradermal testing in
identifying potential causative agents. The negative predictive value
of intradermal skin testing in assessing for IgE-mediated drug
allergies is high; however, the high sensitivity of this testing limits its
specificity, and results must be interpreted in the context of the
pretest probability and the clinical experience of the patient. Skin
tests have also been demonstrated to assist in identifying the
causative agent in type IV reactions and to assess cross-reactivity
between structurally related drugs. Intradermal testing may be more
sensitive than patch testing to assess for type IV drug reactions.
Though some debate continues regarding a mandatory role for skin
testing in the assessment of potential drug allergies, drug
provocation testing or rechallenge is generally regarded as safe in
low-risk individuals with history of urticaria or immediate rash,
whereas skin testing has been proposed as a preliminary
assessment in higher-risk individuals with a history of two or more
reactions, angioedema, or anaphylaxis, prior to consideration of drug
provocation testing.

Section 2 Diseases of the Respiratory System
287 Asthma Elliot Israel

Asthma is a disease characterized by episodic airway obstruction
and airway hyperresponsiveness usually accompanied by airway
inflammation. In most cases, the airway obstruction is reversible, but
in a subset of asthmatics, a component of the obstruction may
become irreversible. In a large proportion of patients, the airway
inflammation is eosinophilic, but some patients may present with
differing types of airway inflammation, and in some cases, there is
no obvious evidence of airway inflammation.

MANIFESTATIONS
Asthma most frequently presents as episodic shortness of breath,
wheezing, and cough, which can occur in relation to triggers but may
also occur spontaneously. These symptoms can occur in
combination or separately. Other symptoms can include chest
tightness and/or mucus production. These symptoms can resolve
spontaneously or with therapy. In some patients, wheezing and/or
dyspnea can be persistent. Episodes of acute bronchospasm, known
as exacerbations, may be severe enough to require emergency
medical care or hospitalization and may result in death.

EPIDEMIOLOGY
Asthma is the most common chronic disease associated with
significant morbidity and mortality, with ∼241 million people affected
globally. Cross-sectional studies suggest that 7.9% of the population
in the United States suffers from asthma as compared to ∼4.3%
prevalence worldwide. Prevalence continues to increase (starting at
7.3% in 2001 in the United States) and is associated with transition
from rural to urban living. Asthma is more prevalent among children
(8.4%) than adults (7.7%). In children, the prevalence is greatest
among boys (2:1 male-to-female ratio), with a trend toward greater
prevalence in women in adulthood. In some patients, asthma
resolves as they enter adulthood only to “recur” later in life.
In the United States in 2016, 1.8 million people visited an
emergency department for asthma, and 189,000 were hospitalized.
The total economic cost in the United States in 2007 was estimated
at $56 billion. In the United States, asthma is more prevalent in
blacks than Caucasians, and black race is associated with greater
case morbidity. The ethnicity with the greatest prevalence in the
United States is the Puerto Rican population.
Asthma mortality increased worldwide in the 1960s, apparently
related to overuse of inhaled β2-agonists. Reduction in mortality
since then has been attributed to increased use of inhaled
corticosteroids. Asthma mortality declined globally from 0.44 per
100,000 people in 1993 to 0.19 in 2006, but further reduction in
mortality has not occurred since that time.

THE PATHWAY TO THE DEVELOPMENT OF
ASTHMA
The pathway to development of asthma can be varied. As illustrated
in Fig. 287-1, there is an interplay between genetic susceptibility
(see below) and environmental exposure and endogenous
developmental factors (e.g., aging and menopause [see “Etiologic
Mechanisms and Risk Factors” and Table 287-1]) that can lead to
the development of asthma. Continued or additional exposures and
triggers (Table 287-2) can affect the progression of disease and the
degree of impairment.

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
■ MECHANISMS LEADING TO ACUTE AND CHRONIC AIRWAY OBSTRUCTION

The pathobiologic processes in the airways that lead to episodic and
chronic airway obstruction of asthma are discussed below. Their
pathologic correlates are highlighted in Fig. 287-2, illustrating the
pathologic changes that can occur in asthmatic airways. These
processes can occur individually or simultaneously. There can be
temporal variation of these processes in an individual based on
exogenous factors, discussed later in this chapter, as well as the
aging process itself. These processes can involve the entire airway
(but not the parenchyma), but there can be significant spatial
heterogeneity, as has now been demonstrated using hyperpolarized
gas ventilation studies and high-resolution computed tomography
(CT) of the thorax.

Airway Hyperresponsiveness 
Airway hyperresponsiveness is a hallmark of asthma. It is defined as an acute narrowing response of
the airways in reaction to agents that do not elicit airway responses
in nonaffected individuals or an excess narrowing response to
inhaled agents as compared to that which would occur in
nonaffected individuals. A component of the hyperresponsiveness
occurs at the level of the airway smooth muscle itself as
demonstrated by hyperresponsiveness to direct smooth-muscle–
acting agents such as histamine or methacholine. In many patients,
the apparent hyperresponsiveness is due to indirect activation of
airway narrowing mechanisms as a result of stimulation of
inflammatory cells (which release direct bronchoconstrictors and
mediators that cause airway edema and/or mucus secretion) and/or
stimulation of sensory nerves that can act on the smooth muscle or
inflammatory cells. Agents and physical stimuli that elicit such
responses are discussed later.
The apparent increased responsiveness of the airways in asthma
may also have a structural etiology. In asthma, airway wall thickness
is associated with disease severity and duration. This thickening,
which may result from a combination of smooth-muscle hypertrophy
and hyperplasia, subepithelial collagen deposition, airway edema,
and mucosal inflammation, can result in a tendency for the airway to
narrow disproportionately in response to stimuli that elicit increased
airway muscle tension. A major therapeutic objective in asthma is to
decrease the degree of airway hyperresponsiveness.

Inflammatory Cells 
While airway inflammation can be precipitated
by acute exposure to inhalants, most asthmatics have evidence of
chronic inflammation in the airways. Most commonly, this
inflammation is eosinophilic in nature. In some patients, neutrophilic
inflammation may be predominant, especially in those with more
severe asthma. Mast cells are also more frequent. Many
inflammatory cells are present in an activated state, as will be
discussed in the section on inflammation.

Airway Smooth Muscle Airway smooth muscle can contribute to
asthma in three ways. First, it can be hyperresponsive to stimuli, as
noted above. Second, hypertrophy and hyperplasia can lead to
airway wall thickening with consequences for hyperresponsiveness,
as noted above. Lastly, airway smooth-muscle cells can produce
chemokines and cytokines that promote airway inflammation and
promote the survival of inflammatory cells, particularly mast cells.

Subepithelial Collagen Deposition and Matrix Deposition
Thickening of the subepithelial basement membrane occurs as a
result of deposition of repair-type collagens and tenascin, periostin,
fibronectin, and osteopontin primarily from myofibroblasts under the
epithelium. The deposition of collagen and matrix stiffens the airway
and can result in exaggerated responses to increased
circumferential tension exerted by the smooth muscle. Such
deposition can also narrow the airway lumen and decrease its ability
to relax and thus can contribute to chronic airway obstruction.

Airway Epithelium Airway epithelium disruption takes the form of
separation of columnar cells from the basal cells. The damaged
epithelium is hypothesized to form a trophic unit with the underlying
mesenchyme. This unit elaborates multiple growth factors thought to
contribute to airway remodeling as well as multiple cytokines and
mediators that promote asthmatic airway inflammation.

Vascular Proliferation In a subset of asthmatics, there is a
significant degree of angiogenesis thought to be secondary to
elaboration of angiogenic factors in the context of airway
inflammation. Inflammatory mediators can result in leakage from
postcapillary venules, which can contribute to the acute and chronic
edema of the airways.

Airway Edema Submucosal edema can be present as an acute
response in asthma and as a chronic contributor to airway wall
thickening.

Epithelial Goblet Cell Metaplasia and Mucus Hypersecretion
Chronic inflammation can result in the appearance and proliferation
of mucus cells. Increased mucus production can reduce the effective
airway luminal area. Mucus plugs can obstruct medium-size airways
and can extend into the small airways.

Neuronal Proliferation Neurotrophins, which can lead to neuronal
proliferation, are elaborated by smooth-muscle cells, epithelial cells,
and inflammatory cells. Neuronal inputs can regulate smooth-muscle
tone and mucus production, which may mediate acute
bronchospasm and potentially chronically increased airway tone.

■ Airway Inflammation (Type 2 and Non–Type 2 Inflammation)
Most asthma is accompanied by airway inflammation. In the past,
asthma had been divided into atopic and nonatopic (or intrinsic)
asthma. The former was identified as relating to allergen sensitivity
and exposure, with production of IgE, and occurring more commonly
in children. The latter was identified as occurring in individuals with
later onset asthma, with or without allergies, but frequently with
eosinophilia. This paradigm is being superseded by a nosology that
favors consideration of whether asthma is associated with type 2 or
non–type 2 inflammation. This approach to immunologic
classification is driven by a developing understanding of the
underlying immune processes and by the development of
therapeutic approaches that target type 2 inflammation (see later
sections on asthma therapy).

Type 2 Inflammation 
Type 2 inflammation is an immune response
involving the innate and adaptive arms of the immune system to
promote barrier immunity on mucosal surfaces. It is called type 2
because it is associated with the type 2 subset of CD4+ T-helper
cells, which produce the cytokines interleukin (IL) 4, IL-5, and IL-13.
As shown in Fig. 287-3, these cytokines can have pleiotropic effects.
IL-4 induces B-cell isotype switching to production of IgE. IgE,
through its binding to basophils and mast cells, results in
environmental sensitivity to allergens as a result of cross-linking of
IgE on the surface of these mast cells and basophils. The products
released from these cells include type 2 cytokines as well as direct
activators of smooth-muscle constriction and edema. IL-5 has a
critical role in regulating eosinophils. It controls formation,
recruitment, and survival of these cells. IL-13 induces airway
hyperresponsiveness, mucus hypersecretion, and goblet cell
metaplasia. While allergen exposure in allergic individuals can elicit
a cascade of activation of type 2 inflammation, it is now understood
(see Fig. 287-3) that nonallergic stimuli can elicit production of type 2
cytokines, particularly due to stimulation of type 2 innate lymphoid
cells (ILC2). These cells can produce IL-5 and IL-13. ILC2s can be
activated by epithelial cytokines known as alarmins, which are
produced in response to “nonallergic” epithelial exposures such as
irritants, pollutants, oxidative agents, fungi, or viruses. Thus, these
“nonallergic” stimuli can be associated with eosinophilia.

The development of anti–IL-5 drugs that dramatically reduce
eosinophils has allowed us to determine that, in many asthmatics,
eosinophils play a major role in asthma pathobiology. They may
induce hyperresponsiveness through release of oxidative radicals
and major basic protein, which can disrupt the epithelium. In
addition, recent CT imaging has suggested that mucus plugs, which
may contain significant amounts of eosinophil aggregates, may
accumulate in the airways and contribute to asthma severity.

Non–Type 2 Processes 
As shown in Fig. 287-2, multiple processes
can contribute to airway narrowing and apparent airway
hyperresponsiveness. While type 2 inflammatory processes are most
common, non–type 2 processes can exist either in combination with
type 2 inflammation or without type 2 inflammation. Neutrophilic
inflammation, as shown in Fig. 287-3, can also occur. This type of
inflammation is more commonly seen in severe asthma that has not
responded to the common anti-inflammatory therapies, such as
corticosteroids, that usually suppress type 2 inflammation. In some
cases, it may also be associated with chronic infection, occasionally
with atypical pathogens such as Mycoplasma, perhaps accounting
for the response of some of these patients to macrolide antibiotics. It
is also commonly seen in reactive airway dysfunction syndrome (see
“Etiologic Mechanisms and Risk Factors”).
In a small subset of asthmatics, the pathologic changes seen in
Fig. 287-2 may occur without any evidence of tissue infiltration by
inflammatory cells. The etiology of such pauci-granulocytic asthma is
unclear.

■ Mediators
Many chemical substances or signaling factors can contribute to the
pathobiologic picture of asthma. Some of them have been
successfully targeted in developing asthma therapies.

Cytokines As illustrated in Fig. 287-3, and as discussed above, IL-4,
IL-5, and IL-13 are the major cytokines associated with type 2
inflammation. They have all been targeted successfully in asthma
therapies. Thymic stromal lymphopoietin (TSLP), IL-25, and IL-33
also play a role in the signaling cascade and are being actively
studied as targets for treatment of asthma. IL-9 has been implicated
as well. IL-6, IL-17, tumor necrosis factor α (TNF-α), IL-1β, and IL-8
have been implicated in non–type 2 inflammation.

Fatty Acid Mediators Proinflammatory mediators derived from
arachidonic acid include leukotrienes and prostaglandins. The
cysteinyl leukotrienes (leukotrienes C4, D4, and E4) are produced by
eosinophils and mast cells. They are potent smooth-muscle
constrictors. They also stimulate mucus secretion, recruit allergic
inflammatory cells, cause microvascular leakage, modulate cytokine
production, and influence neural transmission. Cysteinyl leukotriene
modifiers have shown clinical benefit in asthma. The non-cysteinyl
leukotriene, LTB4, is produced primarily from neutrophils but can also
be synthesized by macrophages and epithelial cells. It is a potent
neutrophil chemoattractant. Prostaglandins are for the most part
proinflammatory. Prostaglandin D2 (PGD2) is produced by mast cells.
Receptors for PGD2 (CRTH2 receptors) are present on TH2 cells,
ILC2 cells, mast cells, eosinophils, macrophages, and epithelial
cells, and the activation of these receptors upregulates type 2
inflammation. Initial studies with drugs blocking CRTH2 have shown
mild to moderate effectiveness in asthma.
There are several classes of fatty acid–derived mediators that are
responsible for the resolution of inflammation. These include the
resolvins and lipoxins. Several studies suggest that deficiencies in
these moieties may be responsible for the ongoing inflammation in
asthma, especially in severe asthma.

Nitric Oxide Nitric oxide is a potent vasodilator, and in vitro studies
suggest that it can increase mucus production and smooth-muscle
proliferation. It is produced by epithelial cells, especially in response
to IL-13, and by stimulated inflammatory cells including eosinophils,
mast cells, and neutrophils. Its precise role in the asthmatic diathesis
is unclear. However, its production is increased in the airways in the
presence of asthmatic eosinophilic inflammation, and it can be
detected in exhaled breath.

Reactive Oxygen Species When allergens, pollutants, bacteria, and
viruses activate inflammatory cells in the airway, they induce
respiratory bursts that release reactive oxygen species that result in
oxidative stress in the surrounding tissue. Increases in oxidative
stress have been shown to affect smooth-muscle contraction,
increase mucus secretion, produce airway hyperresponsiveness,
and result in epithelial shedding.

Chemokines A variety of chemokines are secreted by the epithelium
(as well as other inflammatory cells) and attract inflammatory cells
into the airways. Those of particular interest include eotaxin (an
eosinophil chemoattractant), TARC and MDC (which attract TH2
cells), and RANTES (which has pluripotent pro-phlogistic effects).

ETIOLOGIC MECHANISMS, RISK FACTORS, TRIGGERS, AND COMPLICATING COMORBIDITIES
As illustrated in Fig. 287-1, the development of asthma involves an
interplay between risk factors and exposures (see Table 287-1) and
genetic predisposition.
■ HERITABLE PREDISPOSITION
Asthma has a strong genetic predisposition. Family and twin studies
suggest a 25–80% degree of heritability. Genetic studies suggest
complex polygenic inheritance complicated by interaction with
environmental exposures. Further, epigenetic modifications related
to environmental exposures may also produce heritable patterns of
asthma. Many of the genes related to asthma have been associated
with risk for atopy. However, there appear to be genetic modifications
that predispose to asthma and its severity. Association studies have
identified multiple candidate genes. In many cases, these genes vary
from population to population. The most consistently identified
include ORMDL3/GSDMB (in the 17q21 chromosomal region),
ADAM33, DPP-10, TSLP, IL-12, IL-33, ST2, HLA-DQB1, HLA-DQB2,
TLR1, and IL6R. In many cases, association studies have identified
polymorphisms in noncoding regions of the genome, suggesting that
the majority of the currently identified traits act as “enhancers” of
biologic processes.
Genetic polymorphisms have also been associated with
differential responses to asthma therapies. Variants in the β-receptor
(Arg16Gly in ADRB2), the glucocorticoid-induced transcript 1 gene,
and genes in the leukotriene synthesis and receptor pathways have
been associated with altered response to the pharmacologic agents
acting at those receptors or through those pathways.
While genetic variation plays a key role in asthma susceptibility, it
is important to understand that unraveling the complexities of the
genetic contribution to asthma remains elusive. To wit, only 2.5% of
asthma risk can be explained by the 31 single nucleotide
polymorphisms that have been associated with asthma.
A significant proportion of the heritability of asthma relates to the
heritability of atopy. Atopy is the genetic tendency toward specific
IgE production in response to allergen exposure. Serum levels of IgE
correlate closely with the development of asthma. The National
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) III found that
half of asthma in patients aged 6–59 could be attributed to atopy with
evidence of allergic sensitization. The allergens most associated with
risk include house dust mites, indoor fungi, cockroaches, and indoor
animals.
■ EXPOSURES AND RISK FACTORS
Allergic Sensitization and Allergen Exposure
Like asthma, the
development of allergic sensitization involves an interplay between
heritable susceptibility and allergen exposure. Allergen exposure
during vulnerable developmental periods is believed to increase the
risk of development of allergic sensitization in those with a tendency
toward atopy. Allergic sensitization is increased in industrialized
nations. Recent research has suggested that varied microbiome
exposure (exposure to bacteria and bacterial products) may
influence the development of atopy with decreased risk for atopy in
those in rural environments. Studies of the role of early allergen
avoidance in reducing the risk of developing asthma have produced
contradictory results, possibly related to the inability to eliminate all
allergen exposure.

Tobacco 
Maternal smoking and secondhand smoke exposure are
associated with increased childhood asthma. Childhood secondhand
smoke exposure increased asthma risk twofold. Active smoking is
estimated to increase the incidence of asthma by up to fourfold in
adolescents and young adults.

Air Pollution
Early life exposure to pollution increases the risk of
development of asthma. Proximity to major roadways increases the
risk of early childhood asthma, thought to be attributed to levels of
nitrogen dioxide exposure. Decreasing nitrogen dioxide exposure
has been found to decrease asthma incidence in children. Studies of
exposure to mixed pollutants suggest that most risk lies with carbon
monoxide and nitric dioxide, with marginal effects of sulfur dioxide.
Indoor air pollution from open fires and use of gas stoves has been
associated with increased risk of children developing asthma
symptoms. Mechanistically, pollutants are thought to cause oxidative
injury to the airways, producing airway inflammation and leading to
remodeling and increased risk of airway sensitization.

Infections 
Respiratory infections clearly can precipitate asthma
deteriorations. However, the degree to which respiratory infections
indicate susceptibility to asthma, represent a causal factor, or in
some cases provide protection from asthma is unclear. Incidence
and frequency of human rhinovirus and respiratory syncytial virus
infections in children are associated with development of asthma, but
whether they play a causal role is unclear. Evidence of prior
Mycoplasma pneumoniae infection has been associated with the
development of asthma in Taiwanese adults.

Occupational Exposures 
Occupational asthma is estimated to
account for 10–25% of adult-onset asthma. The occupations
associated with the most cases in European Community Health
Surveys were nursing and cleaning. Two types of exposures are
recognized: (1) an immunologic stimulus (further subdivided into
high-molecular-weight [e.g., proteins, flour] and low-molecular-weight
[e.g., formaldehyde, diisocyanate] stimuli based on whether they act
as haptens or can directly stimulate a response), and (2) an irritative
stimulus. The immunologic form is associated with a latency period
between time of exposure and development of symptoms. The
irritative form, known as reactive airway dysfunction syndrome
(RADS), will be discussed below. A combination of genetic
predisposition (including atopy), timing, intensity of exposure, and
co-exposure (e.g., smoking) influences whether an individual will
develop occupational asthma.

Diet 
There are suggestions that prenatal diet or vitamin deficiency
may alter the risk of developing asthma. The evidence is not yet
definitive, but vitamin D insufficiency may increase asthma risk in the
progeny and supplementation may decrease such risk. Similarly,
preliminary studies suggest that maternal supplementation with
vitamins C and E and zinc may decrease asthma in children. One
study suggested that maternal polyunsaturated fatty acid
supplementation may decrease childhood asthma risk.
Observational studies have suggested that increased maternal sugar
intake may increase childhood asthma risk.

Obesity
Multiple studies suggest that obesity may be a risk factor for
development of childhood and adult asthma. Adipokines and IL-6
have been thought to play a pathobiologic role. Some have argued
that the risk is overestimated, and a study from NHANES II found an
association with dyspnea but not with airway obstruction.

Medications 
There are conflicting data regarding prenatal and early
childhood risk for asthma posed by certain classes of medications.
Use of H2 blockers and proton pump inhibitors in pregnancy has
been associated with an increased risk of asthma in children (relative
risk, 1.36–1.45); however, another study found a small risk for H2
blockers only. Conflicting data have been presented on the risk of
perinatal acetaminophen and early childhood acetaminophen use. In
a prospective study, the use of acetaminophen was not associated
with an increased risk of exacerbations in young children with
asthma, when compared to ibuprofen.

Prenatal and Perinatal Risk Factors 
Preeclampsia and prematurity
have been associated with increased risk of asthma in the progeny.
Babies born by cesarean section are at higher risk for asthma.
Those with neonatal jaundice are also at increased risk. Breastfeeding reduced early wheezing but has a less clear effect on later
incidence of asthma.

Endogenous Developmental Risk Factors Asthma is more
prevalent among boys than girls, with the difference receding by age
20 and reversing (more prevalent among women) by age 40. Atopy
is more prevalent among boys in childhood, and they have reduced
airway size compared with girls. Both factors are thought to
contribute to the sex discrepancy. A subset of women develop
asthma around menopause. Such asthma tends to involve non–type
2 mechanisms. Pregnancy may precipitate or aggravate asthma as
well.

High-Concentration Irritant Exposure and RADS A solitary
exposure to a high concentration of irritant agents that rapidly
(usually within hours) produces bronchospasm and bronchial
hyperactivity is known as RADS. Causative agents include oxidizing
and reducing agents in an aerosol or high levels of particulates. The
acute pathology usually involves epithelial injury with neutrophilia.
There is little evidence of type 2 inflammation. This syndrome differs
from occupational asthma in that these patients have not become
sensitized to the provocative agent and can return to work in that
environment once they have recovered. However, the course of the
disease may be variable, with some series showing documented
abnormalities and persistent symptoms 10 years after exposure.

Fungi and Allergic Airway Mycoses One to 2% of patients with
asthma may have an IgE-mediated sensitization to colonization of
the airway by fungi, with the most common fungus causing such a
reaction being Aspergillus fumigatus. So-called allergic
bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA) is characterized by a type 2
airway inflammatory response to aspergillus with IgE >1000 IU/mL,
eosinophils >500/μL, positive skin test to Aspergillus, and specific
IgE and IgG antibodies to Aspergillus. Patients may have intermittent
mucus plugging and central bronchiectasis. Up to two-thirds of
patients will grow Aspergillus from the sputum. Treatment involves
systemic antifungal treatment with itraconazole or voriconazole and
oral corticosteroids.

Exercise-Induced Symptoms in Elite Athletes Exercise-induced
airway narrowing in elite athletes undertaking extreme exercise in
strenuous condition. These athletes may have little, or no, airway
hyperreactivity or asthma risk factors. The condition may involve
additional mechanisms including direct epithelial injury. Such a
syndrome has also been reported in swimmers possibly related to
pool chlorination.

■ TRIGGERS OF AIRWAY NARROWING
The risk factors and exposures reviewed above lead to increased
airway reactivity and a propensity to react to factors that trigger
airway narrowing (see Fig. 287-1). Almost all asthmatics can identify
triggers that will make their asthma worse. These triggers are listed
in Table 287-2. Many of them overlap with the risk factors and
etiologic factors reviewed above. In some cases, elimination of these
triggers may dramatically reduce the impairment caused by asthma.
In a minority, abatement can lead to “remission” so that these
patients no longer require asthma medications and do not
experience bronchospasm with their daily activities and routines.
While acute exposures to these triggers generally cause short-lived
bronchospasm, the bronchospasm may be severe enough that
treatment for an exacerbation is required. Chronic exposure may
lead to permanent deterioration in asthma control, although this does
not appear to be true for exercise or stress. It should be noted that
evidence suggests that severe asthma exacerbations (those
requiring systemic corticosteroids) may, in and of themselves,
accelerate lung function decline.

Allergens 
In patients with sensitization to particular allergens
through production of allergen-specific IgE, exposure to those
allergens by inhalation can result in activation of mast cells and
basophils with acute production of bronchoactive mediators (see Fig.
287-3). Such exposure can produce immediate bronchospasm (early
response) and a late response (2–24 h after exposure) with
bronchial narrowing and inflammation. These mechanisms can
account for reactions to inhalation of pollens, mold, or dust; insects
(especially cockroaches); animals; occupational materials; seasonal
worsening of asthma; and so-called “thunderstorm asthma.” Chronic
exposure may lead to persistent symptoms. While food allergies can
produce bronchospasm through anaphylaxis, food allergies are
generally not etiologically linked to asthma.

Irritants 
Many asthmatics report increased symptoms on exposure
to strong odors, smoke, combustion products, cleaning fluids, or
perfumes. In general, the effects are short-lived, although chronic
exposure (see “Occupational Exposures” above) and large-quantity
exposures (see discussion of RADS above) can lead to long-lasting
or permanent symptoms.

Viral Infections 
Most asthmatics report that asthma exacerbations
can be triggered by upper respiratory infections. The inflammation
that occurs may be neutrophilic as well as eosinophilic. There is
some evidence that IgE generation may reduce production of
interferon, possibly predisposing to the effects of upper respiratory
viruses. Increased airway reactivity after viral infections generally
persists for 4–6 weeks but, in some cases, may be associated with
permanent changes and impairment.

Exercise and Cold/Dry Air 
Exercise may be a trigger to asthmatic
bronchoconstriction in patients with asthma. Hyperventilation that
occurs with exercise dries the airway lining, changing the tonicity of
lining cells and causing release of bronchoconstrictive mediators.
This effect is more prominent the lower the moisture content of the
air, and since cold air has a lower absolute moisture content, the
lower the temperature of the inspired air, the less exercise is
required to induce bronchoconstriction. In addition, cold air may
produce airway edema during airway wall rewarming. At routine
levels of exercise, these effects are short-lived.

Air Pollution 
Increased rates of exacerbations have been
associated with increased ambient ozone, sulfur dioxide, and
nitrogen dioxide, among other air pollutants.

Drugs 
Beta blockers may trigger bronchospasm even when used
solely in ophthalmic preparations. While the more selective beta
blockers are safe for most asthmatics, beta blocker use may be a
cause of difficult-to-control asthma. Aspirin may precipitate
bronchospasm in those with aspirin-exacerbated respiratory disease
(see “Special Considerations”). Angiotensin-converting enzyme
(ACE) inhibitors (and to a lesser extent angiotensin receptor
blockers) may cause cough.

Occupational Exposures 
In addition to RADS (see above),
episodic and/or recurrent exposures to workplace irritants and/or
substances to which one has become sensitized can produce
symptoms. These symptoms are usually reduced when patients are
away from such exposures on weekends or vacation.

Stress 
Asthmatics may report increased symptoms with stress. The
mechanisms are poorly understood.

Hormonal Factors 
A small proportion of women report a regular
increase in perimenstrual symptoms, and symptoms may worsen
during perimenopause. This may be related to rapid fluctuations in
estrogen levels. Pregnancy can precipitate worsening of asthma in
approximately one-third of pregnant patients.

■ COMORBIDITIES
Comorbidities may make asthma difficult to manage, and the
common comorbidities are listed

Obesity 
Obese adults with asthma have more severe asthma
symptoms than lean adults and are two to four times more likely to
be hospitalized with an asthma exacerbation. Nonrandomized
studies have shown an improvement and significant reduction in
exacerbations after bariatric surgery.

Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease 
The presence of
gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) predicts poor quality of life
and is an independent predictor of asthma exacerbations. Treatment
of symptomatic reflux disease has been shown to produce modest
improvements in airway function, symptoms, and exacerbation
frequency. Treatment of asymptomatic patients has not shown a
benefit.

Rhinosinusitis And/Or Nasal Polyposis 
Rhinosinusitis may be a
manifestation of the eosinophilic inflammation in the lower airway in
asthma. In addition, poorly controlled rhinosinusitis is believed to
aggravate asthma by several potential mechanisms including
inflammatory and irritant effects of the secretions on the lower
airway, neural reflexes, and production of inflammatory mediators
and cells that produce systemic inflammation. Treatment with
intranasal corticosteroids has been shown to decrease airway
reactivity and emergency department visits and hospitalizations.
Evidence for the benefit of surgical therapy is inconclusive. There is
increasing evidence that biologics targeted at type 2 inflammation
may also be particularly useful for asthma associated with
rhinosinusitis and polyposis in particular.
Nasal polyposis is rare in children, and its presence in adults with
asthma should raise suspicions of aspirin-exacerbated respiratory
disease (see “Special Considerations”).

Vocal Cord Dysfunction 
Now known as inducible laryngeal
obstruction, vocal cord dysfunction involves inappropriate narrowing
of the larynx, producing resistance to airflow. It can complicate
asthma and mimic it. It is more commonly seen in women and
patients with anxiety and depression. Definitive diagnosis involves
laryngoscopy during symptomatic episodes or during induced
obstruction.

Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (Copd) 
See “AsthmaCOPD Overlap” under “Special Considerations.”

Anxiety/Depression 
Increased rates of asthma exacerbations occur
in asthmatics with anxiety, depression, or chronic stress. Some
patients may be unable to distinguish anxiety attacks from asthma.

DIAGNOSIS AND EVALUATION
■ APPROACH
A presumptive diagnosis of asthma can usually be made based on a
compatible history of recurrent wheezing, shortness of breath, chest
tightness, or cough related to common bronchoconstrictor
precipitants when appropriate components of the differential
diagnosis have been considered and/or eliminated. In some cases, a
therapeutic trial of low-dose inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) may be
considered. In all but the mildest cases, the diagnosis should be
confirmed with pulmonary function testing or demonstration of airway
hyperresponsiveness. Unfortunately, the diagnosis may be difficult to
confirm after initiation of therapy since airway obstruction and
hyperresponsiveness may be mitigated with therapy. A trial of
tapering medications may be necessary. Studies have shown that
more than one-third of patients with a physician diagnosis of asthma
do not meet the criteria for the diagnosis.
Adjunctive evaluation, as outlined below, should be undertaken to
identify precipitating factors and underlying mechanisms that may be
amenable to specific therapies (e.g., allergen avoidance). Cases that
require more than a daily moderate-dose ICS combined with a longacting β2-agonist (LABA) (together known as ICS/LABA) should
undergo more formal evaluation to assess comorbidities that may
make asthma difficult to control and a reassessment of any possible
confounding diagnoses that may mimic asthma symptoms (see
Table 287-3).
■ PRIMARY ASSESSMENT TOOLS FOR ESTABLISHING ADIAGNOSIS
History 
Patients with asthma most commonly complain of episodes
of wheezing, shortness of breath, chest tightness, mucus production,
or cough upon exposure to triggers listed in Table 287-2. Symptoms
may be worse on arising in the morning. Some may have nocturnal
symptoms alone. However, such patients should be evaluated for
postnasal drip or GERD if that is their sole presenting symptom.
Patients frequently complain of symptoms with rapid changes of
temperature or humidity. Exercise-induced symptoms are common
with increased sensitivity to cold air. As compared to cardiac sources
of dyspnea, exercise symptoms tend to develop more slowly after
initiation of exercise and tend to resolve more slowly unless a β2agonist is administered after the onset of symptoms. A careful
exposure history should be obtained for home (e.g., pets, molds,
dust, direct or secondhand smoke), work (work environment and
exposure to occupational sensitizers), and recreational (e.g.,
hobbies, recreational inhalants) exposures. Allergen-sensitized
patients may complain of symptoms on exposure to known allergens
such as animals and may complain of increased symptoms during
specific pollen seasons. Up to two-thirds of patients with asthma will
be atopic (as opposed to half of the U.S. population), and almost half
will have a history of rhinitis, with many complaining of intermittent
sinusitis. In patients with adult-onset asthma, a careful occupational
history should be obtained and a history of reactions to nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) or use of new medications, such
as beta blockers (including ophthalmic preparations) and ACE
inhibitors (due to potential cough), should be elicited.

Physical Examination 
In between acute attacks, physical findings
may be normal. Many patients will have evidence of allergic rhinitis
with pale nasal mucus membranes. Five percent or more of patients
may have nasal polyps, with increased frequency in those with more
severe asthma and aspirin-exacerbated respiratory disease. Some
patients will have wheezing on expiration (less so on inspiration).
During an acute asthma attack, patients present with tachypnea and
tachycardia, and use of accessory muscles can be observed.
Wheezing, with a prolonged expiratory phase, is common during
attacks, but as the severity of airway obstruction progresses, the
chest may become “silent” with loss of breath sounds.

Pulmonary Function Tests 
Effective reduction of the airway lumen
in asthma produces increased resistance to airflow, which can be
detected as a reduction in expiratory airflow during forced expiratory
maneuvers. The peak expiratory flow rate (PEFR), forced expiratory
volume in 1 s (FEV1), and the FEV1/forced vital capacity (FVC) ratio
are reduced below the lower limit of normal. The flow-volume loop
may show a characteristic scalloping (see Chap. 286). These
findings may not be present during acute attacks or on therapy
(especially after recent use of bronchodilators). Reversibility is
defined as a ≥12% increase in the FEV1 and an absolute increase of
≥200 mL at least 15 min after administration of a β2-agonist or after
several weeks of corticosteroid therapy. Diurnal peak flow variability
of >20% has also been proposed as an indicator of reversible
airways disease, but it is less reliable due to difficulties with quality
control and variability of home assessments. Lung volumes and
diffusing capacity should be normal in uncomplicated asthma.

Assessment of Airway Responsiveness 
In cases where
pulmonary function tests are nonconfirmatory and the diagnosis
remains in doubt, testing to demonstrate increased reactivity to
provocative stimuli in the laboratory can be undertaken.
Methacholine, a cholinergic agonist, inhaled in increasing
concentrations is most commonly used. A provocative dose
producing a 20% drop in FEV1 (PD20) is calculated, with a value
≤400 μg indicative of airway reactivity. Mannitol is used as well, and
occasionally, hypertonic saline may be used. Challenge with
exercise and/or cold, dry air can be performed, with a positive
response recorded if there is a ≥10% drop in FEV1 from baseline. In
the case of suspected environmental/occupational exposures,
specific allergen challenges may be undertaken in highly specialized
labs.

■ ADJUNCTIVE ASSESSMENT TOOLS
Eosinophil Counts 
A large proportion of asthma patients not
treated with oral or high-dose ICSs will have eosinophil counts ≥300
cells/μL. Eosinophil counts correlate with severity of disease in
population studies. Their presence in patients with severe asthma
indicates a likelihood that the patient would respond to medications
targeted at type 2 inflammation. Extremely elevated levels should
prompt consideration of eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis
or primary eosinophilic disorders.

IgE, Skin Tests, and Radioallergosorbent Tests Total serum IgE
levels are useful in considering whether patients with severe asthma
would be eligible for anti-IgE therapy. Levels >1000 IU/mL should
prompt consideration of ABPA. Skin tests, or their in vitro
counterparts that detect IgE directed at specific antigens
(radioallergosorbent test [RAST]), can be useful in confirming atopy
and suggesting allergic rhinitis, which can complicate asthma
management. Allergy investigations may be useful, when correlated
with a history of reactions, in identifying environmental exposures
that may be aggravating asthma.

Exhaled Nitric Oxide Fraction of exhaled nitric oxide (FeNO) in
exhaled breath is an approximate indicator of eosinophilic
inflammation in the airways. It is easily suppressed by ICSs and,
thus, can be used to assess adherence in patients in whom it was
initially elevated. Elevated levels (>35–40 ppb) in untreated patients
are indicative of eosinophilic inflammation. Levels >20–25 ppb in
patients with severe asthma on moderate- to high-dose ICS indicate
either poor adherence or persistent type 2 inflammation despite
therapy.

■ ADDITIONAL EVALUATION IN SEVERE/POORLY RESPONSIVE ASTHMA
In patients with poorly responsive asthma, additional evaluations for
comorbidities (see Table 287-3) may be necessary, including sinus
radiographic studies (even in those who have no symptoms of sinus
disease) and esophageal studies in those who have symptoms of
reflux. In patients with nonreversible disease, many obtain a serum
α1 antitrypsin level. Additionally, the following evaluations may be of
utility in poorly responsive asthma.

Chest Radiography 
Chest CT can be useful to assess for the
presence of bronchiectasis and other structural abnormalities that
could produce airway obstruction. New image analysis tools are
being used in the research setting to assess airway properties such
as airway wall thickness, airway diameter, and evidence of air
trapping.

Sputum 
Induced sputum may be used in more specialized centers
to help characterize type 2 and non–type 2 inflammation by detection
of eosinophils and neutrophils, respectively. In severe asthma, there
is some evidence that some patients may have localized persistent
eosinophilic airway inflammation despite lack of peripheral
eosinophils on blood analysis.

TREATMENT

Asthma
GOALS OF ASTHMA THERAPY AND ASSESSMENT OF CONTROL
Goals of asthma therapy in terms of achieving control of symptoms
and reducing risk (as reflected in frequency of asthma
exacerbations) are listed in Table 287-4. The therapeutic agents
used in treatment are discussed below, and an integrated approach
to care is discussed subsequently.

A comprehensive treatment approach involves avoiding and
reducing asthma triggers and, if necessary, the adjunctive use of
medications. Asthma medications are primarily divided into those
that relax smooth muscle and produce a fairly rapid relief of acute
symptoms and those that target inflammation or mediator
production. The former medications are commonly referred to as
reliever medications, and the latter are known as controller
medications.

REDUCING TRIGGERS
Mitigation 
As shown in Tables 287-1 and 287-2, triggers and
exposures can cause asthma and make it difficult to control. In the
case of those with occupational exposures, removal from the
offending environment may sometimes result in complete resolution
of symptoms or significant improvement. Secondhand smoke
exposure and frequent exposure to combustion products of
cannabis are remediable environmental exposures as well. The
removal of pets that are clearly associated with symptoms can
reduce symptoms. Pest control at home and in the school in those
with evidence of IgE-mediated sensitivity (skin test or IgE RAST)
may also be beneficial. The effect of dust or mold control in
reducing asthma symptoms has been more variable. There is
moderate evidence that dust control (impermeable mattress and
pillowcase covers) in those patients with symptoms and
sensitization may be effective in reducing symptoms only when
conducted as part of a comprehensive allergen mitigation strategy.

Allergen Immunotherapy 
Allergen immunotherapy reduces IgEmediated reactions to the allergens administered. It clearly reduces
the symptoms of allergic rhinitis and thus may be helpful in reducing
this comorbidity. The evidence for its effectiveness in isolated
asthma in those who are sensitized and have clinical symptoms is
variable. Due to the risk of anaphylaxis, guidelines generally
recommend immunotherapy only in patients whose asthma is under
control and who have mild to moderate asthma. The evidence base
for the effectiveness of sublingual allergen immunotherapy in the
treatment of asthma is not substantial.

Vaccination 
Respiratory infections are a major cause of asthma
exacerbations. Patients with asthma are strongly advised to receive
both types of currently available pneumococcal vaccines and yearly
influenza vaccines. COVID-19 vaccination is advised, as well.

MEDICATIONS
Bronchodilators 
Bronchodilators relax airway smooth muscle.
There are three major classes of bronchodilators, β2-agonists,
anticholinergics, and theophylline.

β2-Agonists 
Available in inhaled or oral form, these agents
activate β2-receptors present on airway smooth muscle. Such
receptors are also present on mast cells, but they contribute little to
the efficacy of these agents in asthma. β2-receptors are G protein–
coupled receptors that activate adenyl cyclase to produce cyclic
AMP, which results in relaxation of smooth muscle.

Use 
β2-Agonists are primarily used in inhaled forms to provide
relief of bronchospasm or to reduce the degree of bronchospasm
anticipated in response to exercise or other provocative stimuli.
Regular use has been associated with tachyphylaxis of the
bronchoprotective effect and possible increased airway reactivity.
This may be more common in patients with a polymorphism at the
16th amino acid position of the β2-receptor. Frequent short-acting
β-2 agonist use has been associated with increased asthma
mortality resulting in decreased enthusiasm for use in isolation
without inhaled corticosteroids.

Short-Acting β2-Agonists 
Albuterol (also known as salbutamol) is
the most commonly used agent. Bronchodilation begins within 3–5
min of inhalation, and effects generally last 4–6 h. It is most
commonly administered by metered-dose inhaler. Solutions for
nebulization are also used, especially for relief of bronchospasm in
children. Oral forms are available but are not commonly used.

Long-Acting β2-Agonists 
Salmeterol and formoterol are the two
available LABAs. They have an ∼12-h duration of action.
Formoterol has a quick onset comparable to the short-acting β2agonists. Salmeterol has a slower onset of action. These agents
can be used for prophylaxis of exercise-induced bronchospasm. In
contrast to their use in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD), these agents are not recommended for use as
monotherapy in the treatment of asthma. Their use in asthma is
generally restricted to use in combination with an ICS.

Ultra-Long-Acting β2-Agonists 
These agents (indacaterol,
olodaterol, and vilanterol) have a 24-h effect. They are only used in
combination with ICSs in the treatment of asthma.

Safety 
β2-Agonists are fairly specific for the β2-receptors, but in
some patients and especially at higher doses, they can produce
tremor, tachycardia, palpitations, and hypertension. They promote
potassium reentry into cells, and at high doses, they can produce
hypokalemia. Type B (nonhypoxic) lactic acidosis can also occur
and is thought to be secondary to increased glycogenolysis and
glycolysis and increased lipolysis, leading to a rise in fatty acid
levels, which can inhibit conversion of pyruvate to acetyl-coenzyme A.
Increased asthma mortality was associated with high-potency
β2-agonists in Australia and New Zealand. Increased use of β2agonists for relief of bronchospasm is a clear marker of poor
asthma control and has been associated with increased mortality.
Questions had been raised as to whether adding LABAs to ICS
might be associated with severe adverse asthma outcomes, but
several studies have not detected such outcomes in comparison to
maintaining the ICS dose.

Anticholinergics 
Cholinergic nerve–induced smooth-muscle
constriction plays a role in asthmatic bronchospasm. Anticholinergic
medications can produce smooth-muscle relaxation by antagonizing
this mechanism of airway narrowing. Agents that have been
developed for asthma have been pharmacologically designed to be
less systemically absorbed so as to minimize their systemic
anticholinergic effects. The long-acting agents in this class are
known as long-acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMAs).

Use 
The short-acting agents in this class can be used alone for
acute bronchodilation. They appear to be somewhat less effective
than β2-agonists and have a slower onset of action as well.

Safety 
Dry mouth may occur. At higher doses and in the elderly,
acute glaucoma and urinary retention have been reported. There
was a numerical (but not significant) difference in mortality in
African Americans treated with ICS/LAMA versus ICS/LABA for
asthma.

Theophylline 
Theophylline, an oral compound that increases
cyclic AMP levels by inhibiting phosphodiesterase, is now rarely
used for asthma due to its narrow therapeutic window, drug-drug
interactions, and reduced bronchodilation as compared to other
agents.

Controller (Anti-Inflammatory/Antimediator) Therapies 
Socalled “controller” therapies reduce asthma exacerbations and
improve long-term control, decreasing the need for intermittent use
of bronchodilator therapies. None of these therapies have yet been
shown to prevent progression of airway remodeling or the more
rapid decline in lung function that can occur in a subset of asthma
patients.

Corticosteroids 
Corticosteroids are particularly effective in
reducing type 2 inflammation and airway hyperresponsiveness.
Corticosteroids bind to a cytoplasmic glucocorticoid receptor to form
a complex that translocates to the nucleus. The complex binds to
positive and negative response elements that result in inhibition of
T-cell activation; eosinophil function, migration, and proliferation;
and proinflammatory cytokine elaboration and activation of nuclear
factor-κB. It also attaches to other transcription factors, resulting in
deactivation of other proinflammatory pathways.

Use 
Corticosteroids reduce airway hyperresponsiveness, improve
airway function, prevent asthma exacerbations, and improve
asthma symptoms. Corticosteroid use by inhalation (ICSs)
minimizes systemic toxicity and represents a cornerstone of asthma
treatment.

ICS and ICS/LABA 
ICSs are the cornerstone of asthma therapy.
They take advantage of the pleiotropic effects of corticosteroids to
produce salutary impact at levels of systemic effect considerably
lower than oral corticosteroids. Their use is associated with
decreased asthma mortality. They are generally used regularly
twice a day as first-line therapy for all forms of persistent asthma.
Doses are increased, and they are combined with LABAs to control
asthma of increasing severity. European guidelines now
recommend their intermittent use even in intermittent asthma.
Combining them with LABAs permits effective control at lower ICS
dose. Longer-acting preparations permitting once-a-day use are
available. Their effects can be noticeable in several days, but
continued improvement may occur over months of therapy, with the
majority of improvement evident within the first month of regular
use. Adherence to regular therapy is generally poor, with as few as
25% of total annual prescriptions being refilled. Very high doses are
sometimes used to reduce oral corticosteroid requirements. Not all
patients respond to ICS. Increasing evidence suggests that the
most responsive patients are those with significant type 2–mediated
asthma.

Oral Corticosteroids 
Chronic oral corticosteroids (OCSs) at the
lowest doses possible (due to side effects) are used in patients who
cannot achieve acceptable asthma control without them. Alternateday dosing may be preferred, and pneumocystis pneumonia
prophylaxis should be administered for those maintained on a daily
prednisone dose of ≥20 mg. OCSs are also used to treat asthma
exacerbations, frequently at a dose of 40–60 mg/d of prednisone or
equivalent for 1–2 weeks. Since they are well absorbed, they may
also be used for managing hospitalized patients.

Intravenous Corticosteroids 
Intravenous preparations are
frequently used in hospitalized patients. Patients are rapidly
transitioned to OCS once their condition has stabilized.

Intramuscular Corticosteroids 
In high-risk, poorly adherent
patients, intramuscular triamcinolone acetonide has been used to
achieve asthma control and reduce exacerbations.

Safety 
Chronic administration of systemic corticosteroids is
associated with a plethora of side effects including diabetes,
osteoporosis, cataracts and glaucoma, bruising, weight gain, truncal
obesity, hypertension, ulcers, depression, and accelerated cardiac
risk, among others. Appropriate monitoring and infectious
(pneumocystis pneumonia prophylaxis for those treated chronically
with ≥20 mg prednisone/d) and bone health prophylaxis are
necessary. Intermittent “bursts” of systemic corticosteroids to treat
asthma exacerbations are associated with reduced side effects, but
observational studies have suggested that the cumulative dose over
time is associated with deleterious side effects.
ICSs have dramatically reduced side effects as compared to
OCSs. At higher doses, bruising occurs and osteoporosis can
accelerate. There is a small increase in glaucoma and cataracts.
Local effects include thrush, which can be reduced by use of a
spacer and gargling. Hoarseness may be the result of a direct
myopathic effect on the vocal cords. Rare patients exhibit side
effects even at moderate doses of ICS. Children may experience
growth suppression.

Leukotriene Modifiers 
Agents that inhibit production of
leukotrienes (zileuton, an inhibitor of 5-lipoxygenase) or the action
of leukotrienes at the CysLT1 receptor (montelukast and zafirlukast)
are moderately effective in asthma.
They can improve airway function and reduce exacerbations but
not to the same degree as bronchodilators or ICS, respectively.
They are also effective in reducing symptoms of allergic rhinitis and,
thus, can be used in patients with concomitant allergic rhinitis.
Montelukast, in particular, is frequently used in children with mild
asthma due to concerns of ICS-related growth suppression.
Montelukast use may decrease due to safety warnings regarding
depression with this compound. Leukotriene modifiers are effective
in preventing exercise-induced bronchoconstriction without the
tachyphylactic effects that occur with regular use of LABAs.
Leukotriene modifiers are particularly effective in aspirinexacerbated respiratory disease, which is characterized by
significant leukotriene overproduction. They have also shown
modest effect as add-on therapy in patients poorly controlled on
high-dose ICS/LABA.

CysLT1 Antagonists 
Montelukast and zafirlukast are administered
orally once or twice daily, respectively. The onset of effect is rapid
(hours), with the majority of chronic effectiveness seen within 1
month.

5-Lipoxygenase Inhibition 
Zileuton in its extended form is
administered orally twice a day.

Safety 
Montelukast is well tolerated, but an association with
suicidal ideation has now resulted in a warning label from the U.S.
Food and Drug Administration. Zileuton increases liver function
tests (transaminases) in 3% of patients. Intermittent monitoring is
suggested. It inhibits CYP1A2, and appropriate dose adjustments of
concomitant medications may be necessary.

Cromolyn Sodium 
Cromolyn sodium is an inhaled agent believed
to stabilize mast cells. It is only available by nebulization and must
be administered two to four times a day. It is mildly to modestly
effective and appears to be helpful for exercise-induced
bronchospasm. It is used primarily in pediatrics in those concerned
about ICS side effects.

Anti-IgE 
Omalizumab, a monoclonal antibody to the Fc portion of
the IgE molecule, prevents the binding of IgE to mast cells and
basophils. Reduction in free IgE that can bind to effector cells
blocks antigen-related signaling, which is responsible for production
or release of many of the mediators and cytokines critical to asthma
pathobiology. In addition, through feedback mechanisms, reduction
in IgE production occurs as well. Anti-IgE has been shown to
increase interferon production in rhinovirus infections, decrease
viral-induced asthma exacerbations, and reduce duration and peak
viral shedding. This effect is believed to be due to IgE’s ability to
reduce interferon γ production in response to viral infections.

Use 
In asthma, anti-IgE has been tested in patients with a
circulating IgE ≥30 IU/mL and a positive skin test or RAST to a
perennial allergen. It is generally used in patients not responsive to
moderate- to high-dose ICS/LABA. It reduces exacerbations by 25–
50% and can reduce asthma symptoms but has minimal effect on
lung function. Anti-IgE is dosed based on body weight and
circulating IgE and is administered subcutaneously every 2–4
weeks depending on the calculated dose. In the United States, the
maximum dose is 300 mg every 2 weeks, which generally restricts
the drug to those with a body weight ≤150 kg. Most effects are
generally seen in 3–6 months. Retrospective studies have
suggested that patients with an exhaled nitric oxide approximately
≥20 ppb or circulating eosinophils ≥260/μL have the greatest
response as ascertained by reduction in exacerbations. FeNO is
slightly reduced by treatment, but circulating IgE, as measured by
available clinical tests, is not affected since these tests measure
total circulating IgE, not free IgE.

Safety 
The incidence of side effects is low. Anaphylaxis has been
reported in 0.2% of patients receiving the drug.

IL-5–Active Drugs 
Mepolizumab and reslizumab are monoclonal
antibodies that bind to IL-5, and benralizumab binds to the IL-5
receptor. They rapidly (within a day) reduce circulating eosinophils.

Use 
In patients symptomatic on moderate- to high-dose
ICS/LABA, generally with two or more exacerbations that require
OCS per year and with an eosinophil count of ≥300/μL, IL-5–active
drugs reduce exacerbations by about half or more. FEV1 and
symptoms improve moderately as well. In patients who are not on
chronic OCSs, these drugs are less effective in those with
eosinophil counts <300/μL. They are also effective in reducing the
need for chronic OCSs regardless of circulating eosinophil count
(presumably due to the fact that many of those patients have type 2
inflammation but their circulating eosinophils have been suppressed
by the systemic OCS). FeNO and IgE are relatively unaffected by
these drugs. Most clinical effects are usually seen within 3–6
months.

Safety 
These drugs are associated with minimal side effects.
Mepolizumab and benralizumab are approved for home
administration.

Anti–IL-4/13 
The IL-4 and IL-13 receptors are heterodimers that
share a common subunit, IL-4 receptor α. Dupilumab binds to this
subunit and, thus, blocks signaling through both receptors.

Use 
In addition to effectiveness in the phenotype of patients who
respond to anti–IL-5 therapies, poorly controlled patients on
moderate- to high-dose ICS/LABA with an FeNO of 20–25 ppb also
appear to respond to dupilumab even if their peripheral eosinophils
are not elevated. Dupilumab reduces exacerbations by ≥50%,
decreases symptoms, and may produce more of an effect on FEV1
than anti–IL-5 drugs. It gradually reduces FeNO and IgE levels.
Paradoxically, circulating eosinophil counts may initially temporarily
increase. Most effects are seen by 3–6 months of therapy.

Safety 
Side effects are minimal but cases of serious systemic
eosinophilia associated with the reduction of oral corticosteroids
have been noted. This drug is also approved for home
administration and is also approved for atopic dermatitis.

Bronchial Thermoplasty, Alternative Therapies, and Therapies
Under Development • Bronchial Thermoplasty 
This procedure
involves radiofrequency ablation of the airway smooth muscle in the
major airways administered through a series of three
bronchoscopies for patients with severe asthma. There is some
evidence that it may reduce exacerbations in very select patients.
The procedure may be accompanied by significant morbidity, and
most guidelines do not recommend it other than in the context of
clinical trials or registries.

Alternative Therapies 
Alternative therapies such as acupuncture
and yoga have not been shown to improve asthma in controlled
trials. Studies with placebo have demonstrated that there may be a
significant response to placebo.

Therapies in Development Trials are underway targeting
pathways and receptors shown in Fig. 287-3. Those in more
advanced stages of development include therapies targeting TSLP,
IL-33, and CRTH2. Studies targeting IL-17 and TNF-α have not
shown efficacy, but it is unclear if they were appropriately targeted.
Whether these interventions might prove useful for particular
endotypes of asthma is unclear. Proof-of-concept studies targeting
mast cells via inhibition of tyrosine kinase have suggested efficacy
in severe asthma.

APPROACH TO THE PATIENT

Asthma
U.S. (National Asthma Education and Prevention Program
[NAEPP]) and World Health Organization (Global Initiative for
Asthma [GINA]) guidelines advise a symptomatic approach to
asthma treatment assuming that appropriate measures have been
taken to address asthma triggers, exposures, and comorbidities
enumerated in Tables 287-2 and 287-3. Additionally, adherence
and inhaler techniques need to be addressed. Poor adherence or
poor inhaler technique has been identified as the cause of poor
asthma control in up to 50% of patients referred for poorly
controlled asthma.
The stepwise approach to intensifying and reducing asthma
therapy is outlined in Table 287-5. It involves “stepping” therapy
up or down based on assessment of whether asthma is controlled
by the criteria listed in Table 287-4. Assuming comorbidities have
been addressed, adherence has been evaluated, education
regarding avoiding triggers has been performed, and inhaler
technique is verified, the cornerstone of preferred therapy is the
intensification of ICS therapy in conjunction with the use of a LABA
to achieve greater control at lower ICS doses.
A major change in the stepwise approach, advocated for more
than two decades, has occurred. Evidence has accumulated that
as-needed ICS can be used instead of regular ICS in milder
asthma and that the trigger for such use could be patient
perception of the need to use a reliever inhaler. Since formoterol is
a LABA with a rapid onset, combination ICS/formoterol has been
used as a single agent in multiple studies: as needed without
background therapy in milder asthma, and as needed in addition
to twice daily ICS/formoterol in more severe asthma. Since asthma
mortality can occur even in mild asthma (albeit at lower rates than
more severe asthma), GINA, as part of a comprehensive strategy
of asthma management, recommends ICS/formoterol be used as
the reliever in all steps of asthma severity, including intermittent
asthma (Step 1). NAEPP guidelines utilizing evidence-based
studies recommend that ICS/formoterol be used as the reliever
medication in patients requiring step 3 and 4 therapy (see Table
287-5) and that as-needed concomitant ICS and short-acting βagonist (SABA) can be used as a therapy in step 2. For the sake
of simplicity, an adapted GINA approach is outlined in Table 287-5
with footnotes identifying the major differences from the NAEPP.
Leukotriene receptor antagonists (LTRAs) are alternative
medications in step 2, which may be used in those concerned
about the minimal ICS side effects. However, recent warnings
about suicidal ideation associated with montelukast may make this
approach less appealing. Leukotriene modifiers and long-acting
anticholinergics are possible add-on (adjunctive) therapies in
those requiring step 4 and/or 5 therapies. Biologics are incredibly
effective in their specific endotypes (type 2 with exacerbations and
specific biomarkers, as previously described), but their high cost
currently relegates them to step 5 therapy or beyond.

TREATMENT
Asthma Attacks
Asthma deteriorations of mild to moderate severity can be initially
treated with a β2-agonist administered up to every 1 h. Increasing
the dose of ICSs by four- to fivefold may be helpful as well. If
patients fail to achieve adequate control and continue to require β2agonists hourly for several hours, they should be referred for urgent
care. In the urgent care setting, PEFR or FEV1 should be assessed,
and patients are usually treated with nebulized β2-agonists up to
every 20 min. Those with PEFR >60% of predicted will frequently
respond to β2-agonists alone. If they fail to respond in 1–2 h,
intravenous corticosteroids should be administered. Supplemental
oxygen is usually administered to correct hypoxemia. An LTRA and
magnesium are sometimes given as well. Nebulized
anticholinergics can be administered to produce additional
bronchodilation. Failure to achieve PEFR >60% or persistent severe
tachypnea over 4–6 h should prompt consideration of admission to
the hospital. In-hospital treatment may include continuous
bronchodilator nebulization. Noninvasive positive-pressure
ventilation to assist with respiratory exhaustion is sometimes used
to prevent a need for intubation, and helium-oxygen mixtures may
be used to decrease the work of breathing. Antibiotics should be
administered only if there are signs of infection.

Mechanical ventilation may be difficult in patients with status
asthmaticus due to high positive pressures in the setting of high
resistance to airflow due to airway obstruction. Most patients with
asthma attacks present with hypocapnia due to a high respiratory
rate. Normal or near-normal PCO2 in a patient with asthma in
respiratory distress should raise concerns of impending respiratory
failure and need for mechanical ventilation. Mechanical ventilation
should aim for low respiratory rates and/or ventilation volumes to
decrease peak airway pressures. This can frequently be achieved
by “permissive hypercapnia”—allowing the PCO2 to rise and, if
necessary, temporarily correcting critical acidosis with
administration of fluids to increase the pH. Neuromuscular paralysis
may sometimes be beneficial. Bronchoscopy to clear mucus plugs
has been described but may be dangerous in the setting of
difficulties with mechanical ventilation.

SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS
■ HIGH-RISK ASTHMA PATIENTS
Three to four thousand people die from asthma in the United States
each year. Table 287-6 lists characteristics of patients at high risk for
asthma death. These characteristics should be considered in
evaluating and treating patients who present with asthma.


■ EXERCISE-INDUCED SYMPTOMS
In many cases, the degree of exercise intolerance may reflect poor
asthma control. Treatment involves step therapy of asthma as
outlined in Table 287-5. In other cases, however, asthma may be
well controlled in all other respects, but patients may report that they
cannot undertake the level of exercise they desire. Some increase in
exercise capacity can be achieved by starting at lower levels of
exercise (warming up) and by using a mask in colder weather to
condition the air. Pretreatment with an SABA can increase the
threshold of ventilation required to induce bronchoconstriction.
LABAs may extend the period of protection, but their use alone in
asthma is to be discouraged. For occasional exercise, ICS/LABA can
be used, but regular use may expose the patient to unnecessary
doses of ICS. If regular exercise is undertaken, then LTRAs may
provide protection and can be used regularly. A SABA (or
ICS/formoterol) should always be available for quick relief.
Exercise-induced airway narrowing in elite athletes may be
related to direct epithelial injury. In addition to the above,
conditioning of incoming air may be of major assistance. Ipratropium
has been reported to be of utility as well.
■ PREGNANCY
Asthma may improve, deteriorate, or remain unchanged during
pregnancy. Poor asthma control, especially exacerbations, is
associated with poor fetal outcomes. The general principles of
asthma management and its goals are unchanged. Avoidance of
triggers, especially smoking environments, is critical in view of the
risk of loss of control and, in the case of smoking, its clear effects on
risk of development of asthma in the child. There is extensive
experience suggesting the safety of inhaled albuterol,
beclomethasone, budesonide, and fluticasone, with reassuring
information on formoterol and salmeterol in pregnancy. Animal
studies have not suggested toxicity for montelukast, zafirlukast,
omalizumab, and ipratropium. Antibodies cross the placenta, and
there are few human data on the safety of IL-5–active drugs or anti–
IL-4Rα. Chronic use of OCS has been associated with neonatal
adrenal insufficiency, preeclampsia, low birth weight, and a slight

increase in the frequency of cleft palate. However, it is clear that
poorly controlled asthma during pregnancy carries greater risk to the
fetus and mother than these effects. There should be no hesitancy in
administering routine pharmacotherapy for acute exacerbations.
Initiation of allergen immunotherapy or omalizumab during
pregnancy is not recommended. In cases where prostaglandins are
needed to manage pregnancy, PGF2-α should be avoided since it is
associated with bronchoconstriction.
■ ASPIRIN-EXACERBATED RESPIRATORY DISEASE
A subset of patients (5–10%) present in adulthood with difficult-tocontrol asthma and type 2 inflammation with eosinophilia, sinusitis,
nasal polyposis, and severe asthma exacerbations that are
precipitated by ingesting inhibitors of cyclooxygenase, with aspirin
being the most prominent of such inhibitors. Such patients, classified
as having aspirin-exacerbated respiratory disease, overproduce
leukotrienes in response to inhibition of cyclooxygenase-1, probably
secondary to inhibition of PGE2. These patients should avoid
inhibitors of cyclooxygenase-1, (aspirin and NSAIDs) but can
generally tolerate inhibitors of cyclooxygenase-2 and
acetaminophen. They should be treated with leukotriene modifiers.
Aspirin desensitization can be undertaken to decrease upper
respiratory symptoms and to allow chronic administration of aspirin
or NSAIDs for those that require it. Dupilumab and the IL-5–active
biologics appear to be particularly helpful and appear to be
superseding aspirin desensitization in management except when
chronic administration of aspirin or NSAIDs is required for another
therapeutic indication.
■ SEVERE ASTHMA
Severe and difficult-to-treat asthma, which composes ∼5–10% of
asthma, is defined as asthma that, having undergone appropriate
evaluation for comorbidities and mimics, education, and trigger
mitigation, remains uncontrolled on step 5 therapy or requires step 5
therapy for its control. Severe asthma can account for almost 50% of
the cost of asthma care in the United States. A significant proportion

of these patients have trouble with adherence and/or inhaler
technique, and these factors need to be investigated vigorously.
Almost half of these patients have evidence of persistent eosinophilic
inflammation as evidenced by peripheral blood eosinophils and/or
induced sputum. Those with recurrent exacerbations have a
substantially increased likelihood of responding to the type 2
targeted biologics. Treatment for those with mixed inflammation,
isolated neutrophilic inflammation, or pauci-granulocytic inflammation
remains to be determined. Some data suggest that many of these
patients may have aberrations in the pathways responsible for
resolution of inflammation. A rare patient may have biochemical
abnormalities that interfere with steroid response pathways.
Macrolides are of use in a subset. Studies targeting mast cells, IL-6,
IL-33, and other pathways illustrated in Fig. 287-3 are underway.
Therapies aimed at improving pro-resolving pathways may also be
promising.
■ ELDERLY PATIENTS WITH ASTHMA
Asthma may present at or persist into older age. The mortality of
asthma in those >65 years old is five times greater than that of
younger cohorts even when adjusting for comorbidities. Many of
these patients had asthma as children, some with quiescent periods
as they entered adulthood. Of those with new-onset asthma, almost
half were smokers or are currently smoking. One-quarter of adultonset asthma is believed to be due to occupational exposure.
Patients presenting with eosinophilic inflammation appear to have
more severe asthma. Besides investigations of comorbidities, these
patients may require adjustment to step therapy based on
intolerance of β2-agonist therapy due to arrhythmia or
tremulousness. The coexistence of COPD needs to be carefully
considered (see below).
■ ASTHMA-COPD OVERLAP
Most clinicians agree that asthma-COPD overlap is not a syndrome,
but rather recognize that it may be useful to identify patients who
present with symptoms related to airway dysfunction that may be

due to simultaneous coexistence of both asthma and COPD. From
an asthma perspective, recognition that COPD and smoking can
alter the response to asthma therapies may be important. Smoking
can blunt the response to ICS. Further, it has been difficult to
demonstrate the effectiveness of biologic agents targeted at type 2
inflammation in patients with COPD despite the presence of ≥300
circulating eosinophils/μL. Additionally, in patients with both
diseases, earlier initiation of anticholinergics may be considered.

288 Hypersensitivity Pneumonitis and Pulmonary Infiltrates with Eosinophilia Praveen Akuthota, Michael E. Wechsler

HYPERSENSITIVITY PNEUMONITIS
■ INTRODUCTION AND DEFINITION
Hypersensitivity pneumonitis (HP), also referred to as extrinsic
allergic alveolitis, is a pulmonary disease that occurs due to
inhalational exposure to a variety of antigens leading to an
inflammatory response of the alveoli and small airways. Systemic
manifestations such as fever and fatigue can accompany respiratory
symptoms. Although sensitization to an inhaled antigen as
manifested by specific circulating IgG antibodies is necessary for the
development of HP, sensitization alone is not sufficient as a defining
characteristic, because many sensitized individuals do not develop
HP. The incidence and prevalence of HP are variable, depending on
geography, occupation, avocation, and environment of the cohort
being studied. As yet unexplained is the decreased risk of
developing HP in smokers.
■ OFFENDING ANTIGENS
HP can be caused by any of a large list of potential offending inhaled
antigens (Table 288-1). The various antigens and environmental
conditions described to be associated with HP give rise to an
expansive list of monikers given to specific forms of HP. Antigens
derived from fungal, bacterial, mycobacterial, bird-derived, and
chemical sources have all been implicated in causing HP.
TABLE 288-1 Examples of Hypersensitivity Pneumonitis

Categories of individuals at particular risk in the United States
include farmers, bird owners, industrial workers, and hot tub users.
Farmer’s lung occurs as a result of exposure to one of several
possible sources of bacterial or fungal antigens such as grain, moldy
hay, or silage. Potential offending antigens include thermophilic
actinomycetes or Aspergillus species. Bird fancier’s lung (also
referred to by names corresponding to specific birds) must be
considered in patients who give a history of keeping birds in their
home and is precipitated by exposure to antigens derived from
feathers, droppings, and serum proteins. Occupational exposure to
birds may also cause HP, as is seen in poultry worker’s lung.
Chemical worker’s lung is provoked by exposure to occupational
chemical antigens such as diphenylmethane diisocyanate and
toluene diisocyanate. Mycobacteria may cause HP rather than frank
infection, a phenomenon observed in hot tub lung and in HP due to
metalworking fluid.
■ PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

While much remains to be learned regarding the pathophysiology of
HP, it has been established that HP is an immune-mediated
condition that occurs in response to inhaled antigens that are small
enough to deposit in distal airways and alveoli. From an immunologic
perspective, HP is characterized by dysregulated TH1 and TH17
immune responses. Although the presence of precipitating IgG
antibodies against specific antigens in HP suggests a prominent role
for adaptive immunity in the pathophysiology of HP, innate immune
mechanisms likely also make an important contribution. This is
highlighted by the observation that Toll-like receptors and
downstream signaling proteins such as MyD88 are activated in HP,
leading to neutrophil recruitment. Although no clear genetic basis for
HP has been established, in specific cohorts, polymorphisms in
genes involved in antigen processing and presentation, including
TAP1 and major histocompatibility complex type II, have been
observed. In chronic HP, bone marrow–derived fibrocytes may
contribute to lung inflammation and fibrosis.
■ CLINICAL PRESENTATION
Given the heterogeneity among patients, variability in offending
antigens, and differences in the intensity and duration of exposure to
antigen, the presentation of HP is accordingly variable. Although
these categories are not fully satisfactory in capturing this variability,
HP has been traditionally categorized as having acute, subacute,
and chronic forms. Acute HP usually manifests itself 4–8 h following
exposure to the inciting antigen, often intense in nature. Systemic
symptoms, including fevers, chills, and malaise, are prominent and
are accompanied by dyspnea. Symptoms resolve within hours to
days if no further exposure to the offending antigen occurs. In
subacute HP resulting from ongoing antigen exposure, the onset of
respiratory and systemic symptoms is typically more gradual over
the course of weeks. A similar presentation may occur as a
culmination of intermittent episodes of acute HP. Although
respiratory impairment may be quite severe, antigen avoidance
generally results in resolution of the symptoms, but with a slower
time course, on the order of weeks to months, than that seen with
acute HP. Chronic HP can present with an even more gradual onset

of symptoms than subacute HP, with progressive dyspnea, cough,
fatigue, weight loss, and clubbing of the digits. The insidious onset of
symptoms and frequent lack of an anteceding episode of acute HP
make diagnosing chronic HP a challenge. Unlike with the other forms
of HP, there can be an irreversible component to the respiratory
impairment that is not responsive to removal of the responsible
antigen from the patient’s environment. The disease progression of
chronic HP to lung fibrosis with honeycombing on chest imaging and
hypoxemic respiratory failure can mirror that seen in idiopathic
pulmonary fibrosis (IPF), with a similar prognosis. Diagnostic
uncertainty between these two entities is not uncommon. Fibrotic
lung disease is a potential feature of chronic HP due to exposure to
bird antigens, whereas an emphysematous phenotype may be seen
in farmer’s lung.
The categories of acute, subacute, and chronic HP are not
completely sufficient in classifying HP. The HP Study Group found on
cluster analysis that a cohort of HP patients is best described in
bipartite fashion, with one group featuring recurrent systemic signs
and symptoms and the other featuring more severe respiratory
findings. Some experts have argued for a reclassification of HP into
acute/inflammatory and chronic/fibrotic categories.
Concordant with the variability in the presentation of HP is the
observed variability in outcome. HP that has not progressed to
chronic lung disease has a more favorable outcome with likely
resolution if antigen avoidance can be achieved. However, chronic
HP resulting in lung fibrosis has a poorer prognosis, with patients
with chronic pigeon breeder’s lung having demonstrated a similar
mortality as seen in IPF.
■ DIAGNOSIS
Although there is no set of universally accepted criteria for arriving at
a diagnosis of HP, diagnosis depends foremost on establishing a
history of exposure to an offending antigen that correlates with
respiratory and systemic symptoms. A careful occupational and
home exposure history should be taken and may be supplemented if
necessary by a clinician visit to the work or home environment.
Specific inquiries will be influenced by geography and the occupation

of the patient. When HP is suspected by history, the additional
workup is aimed at establishing an immunologic and physiologic
response to inhalational antigen exposure with chest imaging,
pulmonary function testing (PFT), serologic studies, bronchoscopy,
and, on occasion, lung biopsy. Re-exposure to the offending
environment may be performed to aid in confirming the diagnosis of
HP.
Chest Imaging Chest x-ray findings in HP are nonspecific and can
even lack any discernible abnormalities. In cases of acute and
subacute HP, findings may be transient and can include ill-defined
micronodular opacities or hazy ground-glass airspace opacities.
Findings on chest x-ray will often resolve with removal from the
offending antigen, although the time course of resolution may vary.
With chronic HP, the abnormalities seen on the chest radiograph are
frequently more fibrotic in nature and may be difficult to distinguish
from IPF.
High-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) is a common
component in the diagnostic workup for HP. Although the HRCT may
be normal in acute forms of HP, this may be due to lack of temporal
correlation between exposure to the offending antigen and obtaining
the imaging. Additionally, because of the transient nature of acute
HP, HRCT is not always performed. In subacute forms of the
disease, ground-glass airspace opacities are characteristic, as is the
presence of centrilobular nodules. Expiratory images may show
areas of air trapping that are likely caused by involvement of the
small airways (Fig. 288-1). Reticular changes and traction
bronchiectasis can be observed in chronic HP. Subpleural
honeycombing similar to that seen in IPF may be present in
advanced cases, although unlike in IPF, the lung bases are
frequently spared.

FIGURE 288-1 Chest computed tomography scan of a patient with subacute
hypersensitivity pneumonitis in which scattered regions of ground-glass
infiltrates in a mosaic pattern consistent with air trapping are seen bilaterally. This
patient had bird fancier’s lung. (Courtesy of TJ Gross; with permission.)

Pulmonary Function Testing Either restrictive or obstructive PFTs
can be present in HP, so the pattern of PFT change is not useful in
establishing the diagnosis of HP. However, obtaining PFTs is of use
in characterizing the physiologic impairment of an individual patient
and in gauging the response to antigen avoidance and/or
corticosteroid therapy. Diffusion capacity for carbon monoxide may
be significantly impaired, particularly in cases of chronic HP with
fibrotic pulmonary parenchymal changes.
Serum Precipitins Assaying for IgG antibodies against specific
antigens, either through precipitin testing or direct serum
measurement, can be a useful adjunct in the diagnosis of HP.
However, the presence of an immunologic response alone is not

sufficient for establishing the diagnosis, because many
asymptomatic individuals with high levels of exposure to antigen may
display specific IgG, as has been observed in farmers and in pigeon
breeders. It should also be noted that panels that test for several
specific antigens often provide false-negative results, because they
represent an extremely limited proportion of the universe of potential
offending environmental antigens.
Bronchoscopy Bronchoscopy with bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL)
may be used in the evaluation of HP. Although not a specific finding,
BAL lymphocytosis is characteristic of HP. However, in active
smokers, a lower threshold should be used to establish BAL
lymphocytosis, because smoking will result in lower lymphocyte
percentages. Most cases of HP have a CD4+/CD8+ lymphocyte ratio
of <1, but again, this is not a specific finding and has limited utility in
the diagnosis of HP.
Lung Biopsy Tissue samples may be obtained by a bronchoscopic
approach using transbronchial biopsy, or more architecturally
preserved specimens may be obtained by a surgical approach
(video-assisted thoracoscopy or open approach). As is the case with
BAL, histologic specimens are not absolutely necessary to establish
the diagnosis of HP, but they can be useful in the correct clinical
context. A common histologic feature in HP is the presence of
noncaseating granulomas in the vicinity of small airways (Fig. 2882). As opposed to pulmonary sarcoidosis, in which noncaseating
granulomas are well defined, the granulomas seen in HP are loose
and poorly defined in nature. Within the alveolar spaces and in the
interstitium, a mixed cellular infiltrate with a lymphocytic
predominance is observed that is frequently patchy in distribution.
Bronchiolitis with the presence of organizing exudate is also often
observed. Fibrosis may be present as well, particularly in chronic HP.
Fibrotic changes may be focal but can be diffuse and severe with
honeycombing in advanced cases, similar to findings in IPF.

Clinical Prediction Rule Although not meant as a set of validated
diagnostic criteria, a clinical prediction rule for predicting the
presence of HP has been published by the HP Study Group. They
identified six statistically significant predictors for HP, the strongest of
which was exposure to an antigen known to cause HP. Other
predictive criteria were the presence of serum precipitins, recurrent
symptoms, symptoms occurring 4–8 h after antigen exposure,
crackles on inspiration, and weight loss.
■ DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Differentiating HP from other conditions that cause a similar
constellation of respiratory and systemic symptoms requires an
increased index of suspicion based on obtaining a history of possible
exposure to an offending antigen. Presentations of acute or

subacute HP can be mistaken for respiratory infection. In cases of
chronic disease, HP must be differentiated from interstitial lung
disease, such as IPF or nonspecific interstitial pneumonitis (NSIP);
this can be a difficult task even with lung biopsy. Given the presence
of pulmonary infiltrates and noncaseating granulomas on biopsy,
sarcoidosis is also a consideration in the differential diagnosis of HP.
Unlike in HP, however, hilar adenopathy may be prominent on chest
x-ray, organs other than the lung may be involved, and noncaseating
granulomas in pathologic specimens tend to be well formed. Other
inhalational syndromes, such as organic toxic dust syndrome
(OTDS), can be misdiagnosed as HP. OTDS occurs with exposure to
organic dusts, including those produced by grains or mold silage, but
neither requires prior antigen sensitization nor is characterized by
positive specific IgG antibodies.
TREATMENT

Hypersensitivity Pneumonitis
The mainstay of treatment for HP is antigen avoidance, if possible.
A careful exposure history must be obtained to attempt to identify
the potential offending antigen and to identify the location where a
patient is exposed. Once a potential antigen and location are
identified, efforts should be made to modify the environment to
minimize patient exposure. This may be accomplished with
measures such as removal of birds, removal of molds, and
improved ventilation. Personal protective equipment including
respirators and ventilated helmets can be used but may not provide
adequate protection for sensitized individuals. In some cases, fully
avoiding specific environments may be necessary, although such a
recommendation must be balanced against the effects to an
individual’s lifestyle or occupation. It is not uncommon for patients
with HP due to exposure to household birds to be unwilling to
remove them from the home.
Because acute HP is generally a self-limited disease after a
discrete exposure to an offending antigen, pharmacologic therapy is
generally not necessary. However, in so-called subacute and
chronic forms of the disease, there is a role for glucocorticoid

therapy. In patients with particularly severe symptoms as a result of
subacute HP, antigen avoidance may be insufficient after
establishing the diagnosis. Although glucocorticoids do not change
the long-term outcome in these patients, they can accelerate the
resolution of symptoms. While there is significant variability in the
approach to glucocorticoid therapy by individual clinicians,
prednisone therapy can be initiated at 0.5–1 mg/kg of ideal body
weight per day (not to exceed 60 mg/d or alternative glucocorticoid
equivalent) over a duration of 1–2 weeks, followed by a taper over
the next 2–6 weeks. In chronic HP, a similar trial of corticosteroids
may be used, although a variable component of fibrotic disease
may be irreversible. In advanced cases of chronic HP with
extensive lung fibrosis, lung transplantation may be necessary.
■ GLOBAL CONSIDERATIONS
As the ever-expanding list of antigens and exposures associated
with the development of HP suggests, populations at risk for HP will
vary globally based on specifics of local occupational, avocational,
and environmental factors. Specific examples of geographically
limited HP include summer-type pneumonitis seen in Japan and
suberosis seen in cork workers in Portugal and Spain.

PULMONARY INFILTRATES WITH EOSINOPHILIA
Although eosinophils are normal constituents of the lungs, there are
several pulmonary eosinophilic syndromes that are characterized by
pulmonary infiltrates on imaging along with an increased number of
eosinophils in lung tissue, in sputum, and/or in BAL fluid, with
resultant increased respiratory symptoms and the potential for
systemic manifestations. Because the eosinophil plays such an
important role in each of these syndromes, it is often difficult to
distinguish between them, but there are important clinical and
pathologic differences as well as differences in prognosis and
treatment paradigms.

■ CLASSIFYING PULMONARY INFILTRATES WITH
EOSINOPHILIA AND GENERAL APPROACH
Because there are so many different diagnoses associated with
pulmonary infiltrates with eosinophilia, the first step in classifying
pulmonary eosinophilic syndromes is distinguishing between primary
pulmonary eosinophilic lung disorders and those with eosinophilia
that are secondary to a specific cause such as a drug reaction, an
infection, a malignancy, or another pulmonary condition such as
asthma. Table 288-2 lists primary and secondary pulmonary
eosinophilic disorders.
TABLE 288-2 Pulmonary Infiltrates with Eosinophilia

For each patient, a detailed history is of utmost importance and
can help elucidate what the underlying disease is. Details regarding
onset, timing, and precipitants of specific symptoms can help discern

one diagnosis from another. History regarding pharmacologic,
occupational, and environmental exposures is instructive, and family
and travel history are crucial. In addition to details about the sinuses
and lungs, it is important to inquire about systemic manifestations
and assess for physical findings of cardiac, gastrointestinal (GI),
neurologic, dermatologic, and genitourinary involvement, all of which
may give clues to specific diagnoses. Once the details from history
and physical are teased out, laboratory testing (including
measurements of blood eosinophils, cultures, and markers of
inflammation), spirometry, and radiographic imaging can help
distinguish between different diseases. Often, however, BAL,
transbronchial, or open lung biopsies are required. In many cases,
biopsies or noninvasive diagnostic studies of other organs (e.g.,
echocardiogram, electromyogram, or bone marrow biopsy) can be
helpful.
■ PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Pathologically, the pulmonary eosinophilic syndromes are
characterized by tissue infiltration by eosinophils (Fig. 288-2). In
eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis (EGPA), extravascular
granulomas and necrotizing vasculitis may occur in the lungs, as well
as in the heart, skin, muscle, liver, spleen, and kidneys, and may be
associated with fibrinoid necrosis and thrombosis.
The exact etiology of the various pulmonary eosinophilic
syndromes is unknown; however, it is felt that these syndromes
result from dysregulated eosinophilopoiesis or an autoimmune
process because of the prominence of allergic features and the
presence of immune complexes, heightened T-cell immunity, and
altered humoral immunity as evidenced by elevated IgE, IgG4, and
rheumatoid factor. Because of its integral involvement in
eosinophilopoiesis, interleukin 5 (IL-5) has been hypothesized to
play an etiologic role. Monoclonal antibodies against IL-5 are now in
clinical use for the treatment of eosinophilic asthma and eosinophilic
granulomatosis with polyangiitis and are under investigation for other
conditions characterized by pulmonary infiltrates with eosinophilia.
Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCAs) are present in about
one-third to two-thirds of patients with EGPA; binding of ANCAs to

vascular walls likely contributes to vascular inflammation and injury
as well as chemotaxis of inflammatory cells.
■ ACUTE EOSINOPHILIC PNEUMONIA
Acute eosinophilic pneumonia is a syndrome characterized by
fevers, acute respiratory failure that often requires mechanical
ventilation, diffuse pulmonary infiltrates, and pulmonary eosinophilia
in a previously healthy individual (Table 288-3).
TABLE 288-3 Diagnostic Criteria of Acute Eosinophilic
Pneumonia

Clinical Features and Etiology At presentation, acute eosinophilic
pneumonia is often mistaken for acute lung injury or acute
respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), until a BAL is performed and
reveals >25% eosinophils. Although the predominant symptoms of
acute eosinophilic pneumonia are cough, dyspnea, malaise,
myalgias, night sweats, and pleuritic chest pain, physical
examination findings include high fevers, basilar rales, and rhonchi
on forced expiration. Acute eosinophilic pneumonia most often
affects males between age 20 and 40 with no history of asthma.
Although no clear etiology has been identified, several case reports
have linked acute eosinophilic pneumonia to recent initiation of
tobacco smoking or even electronic cigarette inhalation (vaping), or
exposure to other environmental stimuli including dust from indoor
renovations.

In addition to a suggestive history, the key to establishing a
diagnosis of acute eosinophilic pneumonia is the presence of >25%
eosinophilia on BAL fluid. While lung biopsies show eosinophilic
infiltration with acute and organizing diffuse alveolar damage, it is
generally not necessary to proceed to biopsy to establish a
diagnosis. Although patients present with an elevated white blood
cell count, in contrast to other pulmonary eosinophilic syndromes,
acute eosinophilic pneumonia is often not associated with peripheral
eosinophilia upon presentation. However, between 7 and 30 days of
disease onset, peripheral eosinophilia often occurs with mean
eosinophil counts of 1700. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), Creactive protein, and IgE levels are high but nonspecific, whereas
HRCT is always abnormal with bilateral random patchy ground-glass
or reticular opacities and small pleural effusions in as many as twothirds of patients. Pleural fluid is characterized by a high pH with
marked eosinophilia.
Clinical Course and Response to Therapy Although some patients
improve spontaneously, most patients require admission to an
intensive care unit and respiratory support with either invasive
(intubation) or noninvasive mechanical ventilation. However, what
distinguishes acute eosinophilic pneumonia from both other cases of
acute lung injury as well as some of the other pulmonary eosinophilic
syndromes is the absence of organ dysfunction or multisystem organ
failure other than respiratory failure. One of the characteristic
features of acute eosinophilic pneumonia is the high degree of
corticosteroid responsiveness and the excellent prognosis. Another
distinguishing feature of acute eosinophilic pneumonia is that
complete clinical and radiographic recovery without recurrence or
residual sequelae occurs in almost all patients within several weeks
of initiation of therapy.
■ CHRONIC EOSINOPHILIC PNEUMONIA
In contrast to acute eosinophilic pneumonia, chronic eosinophilic
pneumonia is a more indolent syndrome that is characterized by
pulmonary infiltrates and eosinophilia in both the tissue and blood.
Most patients are female nonsmokers with a mean age of 45, and

patients do not usually develop the acute respiratory failure and
significant hypoxemia appreciated in acute eosinophilic pneumonia.
Similar to EGPA, a majority have asthma, with many having a history
of allergies.
Patients present with a subacute illness over weeks to months,
with cough, low-grade fevers, progressive dyspnea, weight loss,
wheezing, malaise, and night sweats, and a chest x-ray with
migratory bilateral peripheral or pleural-based opacities. Although
this “photographic negative pulmonary edema” appearance on chest
x-ray and chest CT is pathognomonic of chronic eosinophilic
pneumonia, <25% of patients present with this finding. Other
radiographic findings include atelectasis, pleural effusions,
lymphadenopathy, and septal line thickening.
Almost 90% of patients have peripheral eosinophilia, with mean
eosinophil counts of over 30% of total white blood cell count. BAL
eosinophilia is also an important distinguishing feature with mean
BAL eosinophil counts of ∼60%. Both peripheral and BAL
eosinophilia are very responsive to treatment with corticosteroids.
Other laboratory features of chronic eosinophilic pneumonia include
increased ESR, C-reactive protein, platelets, and IgE. Lung biopsy is
also often not required to establish a diagnosis but may show
accumulation of eosinophils and histiocytes in the lung parenchyma
and interstitium, as well as cryptogenic organizing pneumonia, but
with minimal fibrosis. Nonrespiratory manifestations are uncommon,
but arthralgias, neuropathy, and skin and GI symptoms have all been
reported; their presence may suggest EGPA or a hypereosinophilic
syndrome. Another similarity is the rapid response to corticosteroids
with quick resolution of peripheral and BAL eosinophilia and
improvement in symptoms. In contrast to acute eosinophilic
pneumonia, though, >50% of patients relapse, and many require
prolonged courses of corticosteroids for months to years.
■ EOSINOPHILIC GRANULOMATOSIS WITH POLYANGIITIS
(EGPA)
Previously known as allergic angiitis granulomatosis or ChurgStrauss syndrome, this complex syndrome is characterized by
eosinophilic vasculitis that may involve multiple organ systems

including the lungs, heart, skin, GI tract, and nervous system.
Although EGPA is characterized by peripheral and pulmonary
eosinophilia with infiltrates on chest x-ray, the primary features that
distinguish EGPA from other pulmonary eosinophilic syndromes are
the presence of eosinophilic vasculitis in the setting of asthma and
involvement of multiple end organs (a feature it shares with
hypereosinophilic syndrome). Although perceived to be quite rare, in
the last few years, there has appeared to be an increased incidence
of this disease, particularly in association with various asthma
therapies, including leukotriene modifiers and anti-IGE therapy with
omalizumab, possibly due to concurrent systemic corticosteroid
withdrawal (forme fruste EGPA).
The primary features of EGPA include asthma, peripheral
eosinophilia, neuropathy, pulmonary infiltrates, paranasal sinus
abnormality, and presence of eosinophilic vasculitis. The mean age
at diagnosis is 48 years, with a range of 14–74 years; the average
length of time between diagnosis of asthma and vasculitis is 9 years.
EGPA typically occurs in several phases. The prodromal phase is
characterized by asthma and allergic rhinitis, and usually begins
when the individual is in his or her twenties or thirties, typically
persisting for many years. The eosinophilic infiltrative phase is
characterized by peripheral eosinophilia and eosinophilic tissue
infiltration of various organs including the lungs and GI tract. The
third phase is the vasculitic phase and may be associated with
constitutional signs and symptoms including fever, weight loss,
malaise, and fatigue. This phasic progression supports the
hypothesis that there is a pathophysiologic continuum between
eosinophilic asthma, chronic eosinophilic asthma, and EGPA.
Similar to other pulmonary eosinophilic syndromes, constitutional
symptoms are very common in EGPA and include weight loss of 10–
20 lb, fevers, and diffuse myalgias and migratory polyarthralgias.
Myositis may be present with evidence of vasculitis on muscle
biopsies. In contrast to the eosinophilic pneumonias, EGPA involves
many organ systems including the lungs, skin, nerves, heart, GI
tract, and kidneys.

Symptoms and Clinical Manifestations • RESPIRATORY Most EGPA
patients have asthma that arises later in life and in individuals who
have no family history of atopy. The asthma can often be severe,
and oral corticosteroids are often required to control symptoms but
may lead to suppression of vasculitic symptoms. In addition to the
more common symptoms of cough, dyspnea, sinusitis, and allergic
rhinitis, alveolar hemorrhage and hemoptysis may also occur.
NEUROLOGIC Over three-fourths of EGPA patients have neurologic

manifestations. Mononeuritis multiplex most commonly involves the
peroneal nerve, but also involves the ulnar, radial, internal popliteal,
and occasionally, cranial nerves. Cerebral hemorrhage and infarction
may also occur and are important causes of death. Despite
treatment, neurologic sequelae often do not completely resolve.
DERMATOLOGIC Approximately half of EGPA patients develop

dermatologic manifestations. These include palpable purpura, skin
nodules, urticarial rashes, and livedo.
CARDIOVASCULAR Granulomas, vasculitis, and widespread

myocardial damage may be found on biopsy or at autopsy, and
cardiomyopathy and heart failure may be seen in up to half of all
patients but are often at least partially reversible. Acute pericarditis,
constrictive pericarditis, myocardial infarction, and other
electrocardiographic changes all may occur. The heart is a primary
target organ in EGPA, and cardiac involvement often portends a
worse prognosis.
GI GI symptoms are common in EGPA and likely represent an

eosinophilic gastroenteritis characterized by abdominal pain,
diarrhea, GI bleeding, and colitis. Ischemic bowel, pancreatitis, and
cholecystitis have also been reported in association with EGPA and
usually portend a worse prognosis.
RENAL Renal involvement is more common than once thought, and

∼25% of patients have some degree of renal involvement. This may
include proteinuria, glomerulonephritis, renal insufficiency, and rarely,
renal infarct.

Lab Abnormalities Systemic eosinophilia is the hallmark laboratory
finding in patients with EGPA and reflects the likely pathogenic role
that the eosinophil plays in this disease. Eosinophilia >10% is one of
the defining features of this illness and may be as high as 75% of the
peripheral white blood cell count. It is present at the time of
diagnosis in >80% of patients, but may respond quickly (often within
24 h) to initiation of systemic corticosteroid therapy. Even in the
absence of systemic eosinophilia, tissue eosinophilia may be
present.
Although not specific to EGPA, ANCAs are present in
approximately one-third to two-thirds of patients, mostly in a
perinuclear staining pattern, with specific antibodies against
myeloperoxidase detected. Nonspecific lab abnormalities that may
be present in patients with EGPA include a marked elevation in ESR,
a normochromic normocytic anemia, an elevated IgE,
hypergammaglobulinemia, and positive rheumatoid factor and
antinuclear antibodies (ANA). Although BAL often reveals significant
eosinophilia, this may be seen in other eosinophilic lung diseases.
Similarly, PFT often reveals an obstructive defect similar to asthma.
Radiographic Features Chest x-ray abnormalities are extremely
common in EGPA and consist of bilateral, nonsegmental, patchy
infiltrates that often migrate and may be interstitial or alveolar in
appearance. Reticulonodular and nodular disease without cavitation
can be seen, as can pleural effusions and hilar adenopathy. The
most common CT findings include bilateral ground-glass opacity and
airspace consolidation that is predominantly subpleural. Other CT
findings include bronchial wall thickening, hyperinflation, interlobular
septal thickening, lymph node enlargement, and pericardial and
pleural effusions. Angiography may be used diagnostically and may
show signs of vasculitis in the coronary, central nervous system, and
peripheral vasculature.
Treatment and Prognosis of EGPA Most patients diagnosed with
EGPA have previously been diagnosed with asthma, rhinitis, and
sinusitis, and have received treatment with inhaled or systemic
corticosteroids. Because these agents are also the initial treatment

of choice for EGPA patients, institution of these therapies in patients
with EGPA who are perceived to have severe asthma may delay the
diagnosis of EGPA because signs of vasculitis may be masked.
Corticosteroids dramatically alter the course of EGPA: up to 50% of
those who are untreated die within 3 months of diagnosis, whereas
treated patients have a 6-year survival of >70%. Common causes of
death include heart failure, cerebral hemorrhage, renal failure, and
GI bleeding. Recent data suggest that clinical remission may be
obtained in >90% of patients treated; ∼25% of those patients may
relapse, often due to corticosteroid tapering, with a rising eosinophil
count heralding the relapse. Myocardial, GI, and renal involvement
most often portend a poor prognosis. In such cases, treatment with
higher doses of corticosteroids or the addition of cytotoxic agents
such as cyclophosphamide is often warranted. Although survival
does not differ between those treated or untreated with
cyclophosphamide, cyclophosphamide is associated with a reduced
incidence of relapse and an improved clinical response to treatment.
Recent studies examining the efficacy of anti-IL-5 therapy with
mepolizumab compared with placebo have shown promise,
indicating that mepolizumab is a safe and effective corticosteroidsparing agent that can reduce relapses. Other therapies that have
been used successfully in the management of EGPA include
azathioprine, methotrexate, rituximab, omalizumab, intravenous
gamma globulin, and interferon α. Plasma exchange has not been
shown to provide any additional benefit.
■ HYPEREOSINOPHILIC SYNDROMES
Hypereosinophilic syndromes (HES) constitute a heterogeneous
group of disease entities manifest by persistent eosinophilia >1500
eosinophils/μL in association with end organ damage or dysfunction,
in the absence of secondary causes of eosinophilia. In addition to
familial, undefined, and overlap syndromes with incomplete criteria,
the predominant HES subtypes are the myeloproliferative and
lymphocytic variants. The myeloproliferative variants may have
acquired genetic abnormalities, including of platelet-derived growth
factor receptor α (PDGFRα), attributed to a constitutively activated
tyrosine kinase fusion protein (Fip1L1-PDGFRα) due to a

chromosomal deletion on 4q12; this variant is often responsive to
imatinib. Myeloproliferative HES may also be associated with
mutations involving platelet-derived growth factor β (PDGFRβ),
Janus kinase 2 (JAK2), and fibroblast growth factor receptor 1
(FGFR1). Chronic eosinophilic leukemia with demonstrable
cytogenetic abnormalities and/or blasts on peripheral smear is often
categorized with the myeloproliferative HES. Clinical and laboratory
findings in myeloproliferative HES may include dysplastic peripheral
eosinophils, increased serum vitamin B12, increased tryptase,
anemia, thrombocytopenia, splenomegaly, bone marrow cellularity
>80%, spindle-shaped mast cells, and myelofibrosis. The evaluation
for lymphocytic HES includes searching for abnormal T-cell clonal
populations.
Extrapulmonary Manifestations of HES More common in men
than in women, HES occurs between the ages of 20 and 50 and is
characterized by significant extrapulmonary involvement, including
infiltration of the heart, GI tract, kidney, liver, joints, and skin. Cardiac
involvement includes myocarditis and/or endomyocardial fibrosis, as
well as a restrictive cardiomyopathy.
Pulmonary Manifestations of HES Similar to the other pulmonary
eosinophilic syndromes, these HES are manifested by high levels of
blood, BAL, and tissue eosinophilia. Lung involvement occurs in 40%
of these patients and is characterized by cough and dyspnea, as well
as pulmonary infiltrates. Although it is often difficult to discern the
pulmonary infiltrates and effusions seen on chest x-ray from
pulmonary edema resulting from cardiac involvement, CT scan
findings include interstitial infiltrates, ground-glass opacities, and
small nodules. HES are typically not associated with ANCA. IgE may
be elevated in lymphocytic HES variants.
Course and Response to Therapy Unlike the other pulmonary
eosinophilic syndromes, less than half of patients with these HES
respond to corticosteroids as first-line therapy. Although other
treatment options include hydroxyurea, cyclosporine, and interferon,
the tyrosine kinase inhibitor imatinib has emerged as an important

therapeutic option for patients with the myeloproliferative variant,
particularly in individuals with the Fip1L1-PDGFRA gene fusion. AntiIL-5 therapy with mepolizumab or benralizumab also holds promise
for these patients and is currently being investigated.
■ ALLERGIC BRONCHOPULMONARY ASPERGILLOSIS
Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA) is an eosinophilic
pulmonary disorder that occurs in response to allergic sensitization
to antigens from Aspergillus species fungi. The predominant clinical
presentation of ABPA is an asthmatic phenotype, often accompanied
by cough with production of brownish plugs of mucus. ABPA has
also been well described as a complication of cystic fibrosis. A
workup for ABPA may be beneficial in patients who carry a diagnosis
of asthma but have proven refractory to usual therapy. ABPA is a
distinct diagnosis from simple asthma, characterized by prominent
peripheral eosinophilia and elevated circulating levels of IgE (often
>1000 IU/mL). Establishing a diagnosis of ABPA also requires
establishing sensitivity to Aspergillus antigens by skin test reactivity
and/or direct measurement of circulating specific IgE to Aspergillus.
Positive serum precipitins for Aspergillus or direct measurement of
circulating specific IgG to Aspergillus can be used as an adjunct
diagnostic criterion. Central bronchiectasis is described as a classic
finding on chest imaging in ABPA but is not necessary for making a
diagnosis. Other possible findings on chest imaging include patchy
infiltrates and evidence of mucus impaction.
Systemic glucocorticoids may be used in the treatment of ABPA
that is persistently symptomatic despite the use of inhaled therapies
for asthma. Courses of glucocorticoids should be tapered over 3–6
months, and their use must be balanced against the risks of
prolonged steroid therapy. Antifungal agents such as itraconazole
and voriconazole given over a 4-month course reduce the antigenic
stimulus in ABPA and may therefore modulate disease activity in
selected patients. Newer azole agents may be used as well. The use
of monoclonal antibody against IgE (omalizumab) has been
described in treating severe ABPA, particularly in individuals with
ABPA as a complication of cystic fibrosis. Other monoclonal
antibodies used in severe eosinophilic asthma, such as those

targeting IL-5 (or its receptor) or targeting IL-4-receptor-alpha, may
be considered as well in refractory cases.
ABPA-like syndromes have been reported as a result of
sensitization to several non-Aspergillus species fungi. However,
these conditions are substantially rarer than ABPA, which may be
present in a significant proportion of patients with refractory asthma.
■ INFECTIOUS PROCESSES
Infectious etiologies of pulmonary eosinophilia are largely due to
helminths and are of particular importance in the evaluation of
pulmonary eosinophilia in tropical environments and in the
developing world (Table 288-4). These infectious conditions may
also be considered in recent travelers to endemic regions. Loffler
syndrome refers to transient pulmonary infiltrates with eosinophilia
that occurs in response to passage of helminthic larvae through the
lungs, most commonly larvae of Ascaris species (roundworm).
Symptoms are generally self-limited and may include dyspnea,
cough, wheeze, and hemoptysis. Loffler syndrome may also occur in
response to hookworm infection with Ancylostoma duodenale or
Necator americanus. Chronic Strongyloides stercoralis infection can
lead to recurrent respiratory symptoms with peripheral eosinophilia
between flares. In immunocompromised hosts, including patients on
glucocorticoids, a severe, potentially fatal, hyperinfection syndrome
can result from Strongyloides infection. Paragonimiasis, filariasis,
and visceral larval migrans can all cause pulmonary eosinophilia as
well.
TABLE 288-4 Infectious Causes of Pulmonary Eosinophilia

■ DRUGS AND TOXINS
A host of medications are associated with the development of
pulmonary infiltrates with peripheral eosinophilia. Therefore, drug
reaction must always be included in the differential diagnosis of
pulmonary eosinophilia. Although the list of medications associated
with pulmonary eosinophilia is ever expanding, common culprits
include nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications and systemic
antibiotics. Additionally, various and diverse environmental
exposures such as particulate metals, scorpion stings, and
inhalational drugs of abuse may also cause pulmonary eosinophilia.
Radiation therapy for breast cancer has been linked with eosinophilic
pulmonary infiltration as well. The mainstay of treatment is removal

of the offending exposure, although glucocorticoids may be
necessary if respiratory symptoms are severe.
■ GLOBAL CONSIDERATIONS
In the United States, drug-induced eosinophilic pneumonias are the
most common cause of eosinophilic pulmonary infiltrates. A travel
history or evidence of recent immigration should prompt the
consideration of parasite-associated disorders. Tropical eosinophilia
is usually caused by filarial infection; however, eosinophilic
pneumonias also occur with other parasites such as Ascaris spp.,
Ancylostoma spp., Toxocara spp., and Strongyloides stercoralis.
Tropical eosinophilia due to Wuchereria bancrofti or Wuchereria
malayi occurs most commonly in southern Asia, Africa, and South
America and is treated successfully with diethylcarbamazine. In the
United States, Strongyloides is endemic to the southeastern and
Appalachian regions.


289 Occupational and Environmental Lung Disease John R. Balmes
Occupational and environmental lung diseases are difficult to
distinguish from those of nonenvironmental origin. Virtually all major
categories of pulmonary disease can be caused by environmental
agents, and environmentally related disease usually presents
clinically in a manner indistinguishable from that of disease not
caused by such agents. In addition, the etiology of many diseases
may be multifactorial; occupational and environmental factors may
interact with other factors (such as smoking and genetic risk). It is
often only after a careful exposure history is taken that the
underlying workplace or general environmental exposure is
uncovered.
Why is knowledge of occupational or environmental etiology so
important? Patient management and prognosis are affected
significantly by such knowledge. For example, patients with
occupational asthma or hypersensitivity pneumonitis often cannot be
managed adequately without cessation of exposure to the offending
agent. Establishment of cause may have significant legal and
financial implications for a patient who no longer can work in his or
her usual job. Other exposed people may be identified as having the
disease or prevented from getting it. In addition, new associations
between exposure and disease may be identified (e.g., nylon flock
worker’s lung disease and diacetyl-induced bronchiolitis obliterans).
Although the exact proportion of lung disease due to occupational
and environmental factors is unknown, a large number of individuals
are at risk. For example, 15–20% of the burden of adult asthma and
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) has been estimated
to be due to occupational factors.
■ HISTORY AND EXPOSURE ASSESSMENT

The patient’s history is of paramount importance in assessing any
potential occupational or environmental exposure. Inquiry into
specific work practices should include questions about the specific
contaminants involved, the presence of visible dusts, chemical
odors, the size and ventilation of workspaces, the use of respiratory
protective equipment, and whether coworkers have similar
complaints. The temporal association of exposure at work and
symptoms may provide clues to occupation-related disease. In
addition, the patient must be questioned about alternative sources of
exposure to potentially toxic agents, including hobbies, home
characteristics, exposure to secondhand smoke, and proximity to
traffic or industrial facilities. Short-term and long-term exposures to
potential toxic agents in the distant past also must be considered.
Workers in the United States have the right to know about
potential hazards in their workplaces under federal Occupational
Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) regulations. Employers
must provide specific information about potential hazardous agents
in products being used through Safety Data Sheets as well as
training in personal protective equipment and environmental control
procedures. However, the introduction of new processes and/or new
chemical compounds may change exposure significantly, and often
only the employee on the production line is aware of the change. For
the physician caring for a patient with a suspected work-related
illness, a visit to the work site can be very instructive. Alternatively,
an affected worker can request an inspection by OSHA. If reliable
environmental sampling data are available, that information should
be used in assessing a patient’s exposure. Because chronic
diseases may result from exposure over many years, current
environmental measurements should be combined with work
histories to arrive at estimates of past exposure.
■ LABORATORY TESTS
Exposures to inorganic and organic dusts can cause interstitial lung
disease that presents with a restrictive pattern and a decreased
diffusing capacity (Chap. 285). Similarly, exposures to a number of
dusts or chemical agents may result in occupational asthma or
COPD that is characterized by airway obstruction. Measurement of

change in forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) before and after a
working shift can be used to detect an acute bronchoconstrictive
response.
The chest radiograph is useful in detecting and monitoring the
pulmonary response to mineral dusts, certain metals, and organic
dusts capable of inducing hypersensitivity pneumonitis. The
International Labour Organisation (ILO) International Classification of
Radiographs of Pneumoconioses classifies chest radiographs by the
nature and size of opacities seen and the extent of involvement of
the parenchyma. In general, small rounded opacities are seen in
silicosis or coal worker’s pneumoconiosis, and small linear opacities
are seen in asbestosis. Although useful for epidemiologic studies
and screening large numbers of workers, the ILO system can be
problematic when applied to an individual worker’s chest radiograph.
With dusts causing rounded opacities, the degree of involvement on
the chest radiograph may be extensive, whereas pulmonary function
may be only minimally impaired. In contrast, in pneumoconiosis
causing linear, irregular opacities like those seen in asbestosis, the
radiograph may lead to underestimation of the severity of the
impairment until relatively late in the disease. For patients with a
history of asbestos exposure, conventional computed tomography
(CT) is more sensitive for the detection of pleural thickening, and
high-resolution CT (HRCT) improves the detection of asbestosis.
Other procedures that may be of use in identifying the role of
environmental exposures in causing lung disease include skin prick
testing or specific IgE antibody titers for evidence of immediate
hypersensitivity to agents capable of inducing occupational asthma
(e.g., flour antigens in bakers), specific IgG precipitating antibody
titers for agents capable of causing hypersensitivity pneumonitis
(e.g., pigeon antigen in bird handlers), and assays for specific cellmediated immune responses (e.g., beryllium lymphocyte proliferation
testing in nuclear workers or tuberculin skin testing in health care
workers). Sometimes a bronchoscopy to obtain transbronchial
biopsies of lung tissue may be required for histologic diagnosis
(chronic beryllium disease [CBD]). Rarely, video-assisted
thoracoscopic surgery to obtain a larger sample of lung tissue may
be required to determine the specific diagnosis of environmentally

induced lung disease (hypersensitivity pneumonitis or giant cell
interstitial pneumonitis due to cobalt exposure).
■ DETERMINANTS OF INHALATIONAL EXPOSURE
The chemical and physical characteristics of inhaled agents affect
both the dose and the site of deposition in the respiratory tract.
Water-soluble gases such as ammonia and sulfur dioxide are
absorbed in the lining fluid of the upper and proximal airways and
thus tend to produce irritative and bronchoconstrictive responses. In
contrast, nitrogen dioxide and phosgene, which are less soluble,
may penetrate to the bronchioles and alveoli in sufficient quantities
to produce acute chemical pneumonitis.
Particle size of air contaminants must also be considered.
Because of their settling velocities in air, particles >10–15 μm in
diameter do not penetrate beyond the nose and throat. Particles <10
μm in size are deposited below the larynx. These particles are
divided into three size fractions on the basis of their size
characteristics and sources. Particles ∼2.5–10 μm (coarse-mode
fraction) contain crustal elements such as silica, aluminum, and iron.
These particles mostly deposit relatively high in the tracheobronchial
tree. Although the total mass of an ambient sample is dominated by
these larger respirable particles, the number of particles, and
therefore the surface area on which potential toxic agents can
deposit and be carried to the lower airways, is dominated by
particles <2.5 μm (fine-mode fraction). These fine particles are
created primarily by the burning of fossil fuels or high-temperature
industrial processes resulting in condensation products from gases,
fumes, or vapors. The smallest particles, those <0.1 μm in size,
represent the ultrafine fraction and make up the largest number of
particles; they tend to remain in the airstream and deposit in the lung
only on a random basis as they come into contact with the alveolar
walls. If they do deposit, however, particles of this size range may
penetrate into the circulation and be carried to extrapulmonary sites.
New technologies create particles of this size (“nanoparticles”) for
use in many commercial applications. Besides the size
characteristics of particles and the solubility of gases, the actual
chemical composition, mechanical properties, and immunogenicity or

infectivity of inhaled material determine in large part the nature of the
diseases found among exposed persons.

OCCUPATIONAL EXPOSURES AND PULMONARY
DISEASE
Table 289-1 provides broad categories of exposure in the workplace
and diseases associated with chronic exposure in those industries.
TABLE 289-1 Categories of Occupational Exposure and
Associated Respiratory Conditions

■ ASBESTOS-RELATED DISEASES
Asbestos is a generic term for several different mineral silicates,
including chrysolite, amosite, anthophyllite, and crocidolite. In
addition to workers involved in the production of asbestos products
(mining, milling, and manufacturing), many workers in the
shipbuilding and construction trades, including pipe fitters and
boilermakers, were occupationally exposed because asbestos was

widely used during the twentieth century for its thermal and electrical
insulation properties. Asbestos also was used in the manufacture of
fire-resistant textiles, in cement and floor tiles, and in friction
materials such as brake and clutch linings.
Exposure to asbestos is not limited to persons who directly
handle the material. Cases of asbestos-related diseases have been
encountered in individuals with only bystander exposure, such as
painters and electricians who worked alongside insulation workers in
a shipyard. Community exposure resulted from the use of asbestoscontaining mine and mill tailings as landfill, road surface, and
playground material (e.g., Libby, MT, the site of a vermiculite mine in
which the ore was contaminated with asbestos). Finally, exposure
can occur from the disturbance of naturally occurring asbestos (e.g.,
from increasing residential development in the foothills of the Sierra
Mountains in California).
Asbestos has largely been replaced in the developed world with
synthetic mineral fibers such as fiberglass and refractory ceramic
fibers, but it continues to be used in the developing world. The major
health effects from exposure to asbestos are pleural and pulmonary
fibrosis, cancers of the respiratory tract, and pleural and peritoneal
mesothelioma.
Asbestosis is a diffuse interstitial fibrosing disease of the lung
that is directly related to the intensity and duration of exposure. The
disease resembles other forms of diffuse interstitial fibrosis (Chap.
293). Usually, exposure has taken place for at least 10 years before
the disease becomes manifest. The mechanisms by which asbestos
fibers induce lung fibrosis are not completely understood but are
known to involve oxidative injury due to the generation of reactive
oxygen species by the transition metals on the surface of the fibers
as well as from cells engaged in phagocytosis.
Past exposure to asbestos is specifically indicated by pleural
plaques on chest radiographs, which are characterized by either
thickening or calcification along the parietal pleura, particularly along
the lower lung fields, the diaphragm, and the cardiac border. Without
additional manifestations, pleural plaques imply only exposure, not
pulmonary impairment. Benign pleural effusions also may occur.

Irregular or linear opacities that usually are first noted in the lower
lung fields are the chest radiographic hallmark of asbestosis. An
indistinct heart border or a “ground-glass” appearance in the lung
fields may be seen. HRCT may show distinct changes of subpleural
curvilinear lines 5–10 mm in length that appear to be parallel to the
pleural surface (Fig. 289-1).

FIGURE 289-1 Asbestosis. A. Frontal chest radiograph shows bilateral calcified
pleural plaques consistent with asbestos-related pleural disease. Poorly defined
linear and reticular abnormalities are seen in the lower lobes bilaterally. B. Axial
high-resolution computed tomography of the thorax obtained through the lung
bases shows bilateral, subpleural reticulation (black arrows), representing fibrotic
lung disease due to asbestosis. Subpleural lines are also present (arrowheads),
characteristic of, though not specific for, asbestosis. Calcified pleural plaques
representing asbestos-related pleural disease (white arrows) are also evident.

Pulmonary function testing in asbestosis reveals a restrictive
pattern with a decrease in both lung volumes and diffusing capacity.
There may also be evidence of mild airflow obstruction (due to
peribronchiolar fibrosis).
Because no specific therapy is available for asbestosis,
supportive care is the same as that given to any patient with diffuse
interstitial fibrosis of any cause. In general, newly diagnosed cases
will have resulted from exposures that occurred many years before.
Lung cancer (Chap. 78) is the most common cancer associated
with asbestos exposure. The excess frequency of lung cancer (all
histologic types) in asbestos workers is associated with a minimum
latency of 15–19 years between first exposure and development of
the disease. Persons with more exposure are at greater risk of
disease. In addition, there is a significant interactive effect of
smoking and asbestos exposure that results in greater risk than what
would be expected from the additive effect of each factor.
Mesotheliomas (Chap. 294), both pleural and peritoneal, are also
associated with asbestos exposure. In contrast to lung cancers,
these tumors do not appear to be associated with smoking.
Relatively short-term asbestos exposures of ≤1–2 years, occurring
up to 40 years in the past, have been associated with the
development of mesotheliomas (an observation that emphasizes the
importance of obtaining a complete environmental exposure history).

Although the risk of mesothelioma is much less than that of lung
cancer among asbestos-exposed workers, ∼3000 cases per year
are diagnosed in the United States.
Because epidemiologic studies have shown that >80% of
mesotheliomas may be associated with asbestos exposure,
documented mesothelioma in a patient with occupational or
environmental exposure to asbestos may be compensable.
■ SILICOSIS
Despite being one of the oldest known occupational pulmonary
hazards, free silica (SiO2), or crystalline quartz, is still a major cause
of disease. The major occupational exposures include mining;
stonecutting; sand blasting; glass and cement manufacturing;
foundry work; packing of silica flour; and quarrying, particularly of
granite. Most often, pulmonary fibrosis due to silica exposure
(silicosis) occurs in a dose-response fashion after many years of
exposure. Two recent outbreaks of silicosis have involved
sandblasting of denim jeans to make them look “used,” and
manufacture and installation of artificial stone (“faux granite”) kitchen
countertops.
Workers heavily exposed through sandblasting in confined
spaces, tunneling through rock with a high quartz content (15–25%),
or the manufacture of abrasive soaps may develop acute silicosis
with as little as 10 months of exposure. The clinical and pathologic
features of acute silicosis are similar to those of pulmonary alveolar
proteinosis (Chap. 293). The chest radiograph may show profuse
miliary infiltration or consolidation, and there is a characteristic
HRCT pattern known as “crazy paving” (Fig. 289-2). The disease
may be quite severe and progressive despite the discontinuation of
exposure. Whole-lung lavage may provide symptomatic relief and
slow the progression.

FIGURE 289-2 Acute silicosis. This high-resolution computed tomography scan
shows multiple small nodules consistent with silicosis but also diffuse ground-glass
densities with thickened intralobular and interlobular septa producing polygonal
shapes. This has been referred to as “crazy paving.”

With long-term, less intense exposure, small rounded opacities in
the upper lobes may appear on the chest radiograph after 15–20
years of exposure, usually without associated impairment of lung
function (simple silicosis). Calcification of hilar nodes may occur in
as many as 20% of cases and produces a characteristic “eggshell”
pattern. Silicotic nodules may be identified more readily by HRCT
(Fig. 289-3). The nodular fibrosis may be progressive in the absence
of further exposure, with coalescence and formation of
nonsegmental conglomerates of irregular masses >1 cm in diameter

(complicated silicosis). These masses can become quite large, and
when this occurs, the term progressive massive fibrosis (PMF) is
applied. Significant functional impairment with both restrictive and
obstructive components may be associated with PMF.

FIGURE 289-3 Chronic silicosis. A. Frontal chest radiograph in a patient with
silicosis shows variably sized, poorly defined nodules (arrows) predominating in
the upper lobes. B. Axial thoracic computed tomography image through the lung
apices shows numerous small nodules, more pronounced in the right upper lobe.
A number of the nodules are subpleural in location (arrows).

Because silica causes alveolar macrophage dysfunction, patients
with silicosis are at greater risk of acquiring lung infections that
involve these cells as a primary defense (Mycobacterium
tuberculosis, atypical mycobacteria, and fungi). Because of the
increased risk of active tuberculosis, the recommended treatment of
latent tuberculosis in these patients is longer. Silica has
immunoadjuvant properties, and another potential clinical
complication of silicosis is autoimmune connective tissue disorders
such as rheumatoid arthritis and scleroderma. In addition, there are
sufficient epidemiologic data that the International Agency for
Research on Cancer lists silica as a probable lung carcinogen.
Other, less hazardous silicates include fuller’s earth, kaolin, mica,
diatomaceous earths, silica gel, soapstone, carbonate dusts, and
cement dusts. The production of fibrosis in workers exposed to these
agents is believed to be related either to the free silica content of
these dusts or, for substances that contain no free silica, to the
potentially large dust loads to which these workers may be exposed.
Some silicates, including talc and vermiculite, may be contaminated
with asbestos. Fibrosis of lung or pleura, lung cancer, and
mesothelioma have been associated with chronic exposure to talc
and vermiculite dusts.
■ COAL WORKER’S PNEUMOCONIOSIS (CWP)
Occupational exposure to coal dust can lead to CWP, which has
enormous social, economic, and medical significance in every nation
in which coal mining is an important industry. Simple radiographically
identified CWP is seen in ∼10% of all coal miners and in as many as
50% of anthracite miners with >20 years of work on the coal face.
The prevalence of disease is lower in workers in bituminous coal
mines.
With prolonged exposure to coal dust (i.e., 15–20 years), small,
rounded opacities similar to those of silicosis may develop. As in

silicosis, the presence of these nodules (simple CWP) usually is not
associated with pulmonary impairment. In addition to CWP, coal dust
can cause chronic bronchitis and COPD (Chap. 292). The effects of
coal dust are additive to those of cigarette smoking.
Complicated CWP is manifested by the appearance on the chest
radiograph of nodules ≥1 cm in diameter generally confined to the
upper half of the lungs. As in silicosis, this condition can progress to
PMF that is accompanied by severe lung function deficits and
associated with premature mortality. Despite improvements in
technology to protect coal miners, cases of PMF still occur in the
United States at a disturbing rate.
Caplan syndrome (Chap. 358), first described in coal miners but
subsequently in patients with silicosis, is the combination of
pneumoconiotic nodules and seropositive rheumatoid arthritis. Silica
is often present in anthracitic coal dust, and its presence may
contribute to risk of PMF.
■ CHRONIC BERYLLIUM DISEASE
Beryllium is a lightweight metal with tensile strength, good electrical
conductivity, and value in the control of nuclear reactions through its
ability to quench neutrons. Although beryllium may produce an acute
pneumonitis, it is far more commonly associated with a chronic
granulomatous inflammatory disease that is similar to sarcoidosis
(Chap. 367). Unless one inquires specifically about occupational
exposures to beryllium in the manufacture of alloys, ceramics, or
high-technology electronics in a patient with sarcoidosis, one may
miss entirely the etiologic relationship to the occupational exposure.
What distinguishes CBD from sarcoidosis is evidence of a specific
cell-mediated immune response (i.e., delayed hypersensitivity) to
beryllium.
The test that usually provides this evidence is the beryllium
lymphocyte proliferation test (BeLPT). The BeLPT compares the in
vitro proliferation of lymphocytes from blood or bronchoalveolar
lavage in the presence of beryllium salts with that of unstimulated
cells. Proliferation is usually measured by lymphocyte uptake of
radiolabeled thymidine.

Chest imaging findings are similar to those of sarcoidosis
(nodules along septal lines) except that hilar adenopathy is
somewhat less common. As with sarcoidosis, pulmonary function
test results may show restrictive and/or obstructive ventilatory
deficits and decreased diffusing capacity. With early disease, both
chest imaging studies and pulmonary function tests may be normal.
Fiberoptic bronchoscopy with transbronchial lung biopsy usually is
required to make the diagnosis of CBD. In a beryllium-sensitized
individual, the presence of noncaseating granulomas or monocytic
infiltration in lung tissue establishes the diagnosis. Accumulation of
beryllium-specific CD4+ T cells occurs in the granulomatous
inflammation seen on lung biopsy. Susceptibility to CBD is highly
associated with human leukocyte antigen DP (HLA-DP) alleles that
have a glutamic acid in position 69 of the β chain.
■ OTHER METALS
Aluminum and titanium dioxide have been rarely associated with a
sarcoid-like reaction in lung tissue. Exposure to dust containing
tungsten carbide, also known as “hard metal,” may produce giant cell
interstitial pneumonitis. Cobalt is a constituent of tungsten carbide
and is the likely etiologic agent of both the interstitial pneumonitis
and the occupational asthma that may occur. The most common
exposures to tungsten carbide occur in tool and dye, saw blade, and
drill bit manufacture. Diamond polishing may also involve exposure
to cobalt dust. In patients with interstitial lung disease, one should
always inquire about exposure to metal fumes and/or dusts.
Especially when sarcoidosis appears to be the diagnosis, one should
always consider possible CBD.
■ OTHER INORGANIC DUSTS
Most of the inorganic dusts discussed thus far are associated with
the production of either dust macules or interstitial fibrotic changes in
the lung. Other inorganic and organic dusts (see categories in Table
289-1), along with some of the dusts previously discussed, are
associated with chronic mucus hypersecretion (chronic bronchitis),
with or without reduction of expiratory flow rates. Cigarette smoking

is the major cause of these conditions, and any effort to attribute
some component of the disease to occupational and environmental
exposures must take cigarette smoking into account. Most studies
suggest an additive effect of dust exposure and smoking. The
pattern of the irritant dust effect is similar to that of cigarette
smoking, suggesting that small airway inflammation may be the
initial site of pathologic response in those cases and continued
exposure may lead to chronic bronchitis and COPD.
■ ORGANIC DUSTS
Some of the specific diseases associated with organic dusts are
discussed in detail in the chapters on asthma (Chap. 287) and
hypersensitivity pneumonitis (Chap. 288). Many of these diseases
are named for the specific setting in which they are found, e.g.,
farmer’s lung, malt worker’s disease, and mushroom worker’s
disease. Often the temporal relation of symptoms to exposure
furnishes the best evidence for the diagnosis. Three occupational
exposures are singled out for discussion here because they affect
the largest proportions of workers.
Cotton Dust (Byssinosis) Workers occupationally exposed to
cotton dust (but also to flax, hemp, or jute dust) in the production of
yarns for textiles and rope making are at risk for an asthma-like
syndrome known as byssinosis. The risk of byssinosis is associated
with both cotton dust and endotoxin levels in the workplace
environment.
Byssinosis is characterized clinically as occasional (early-stage)
and then regular (late-stage) chest tightness toward the end of the
first day of the workweek (“Monday chest tightness”). Exposed
workers may show a significant drop in FEV1 over the course of a
Monday workshift. Initially the symptoms do not recur on subsequent
days of the week, but in a subset of workers, chest tightness may
recur or persist throughout the workweek. After >10 years of
exposure, workers with recurrent symptoms are more likely to have
an obstructive pattern on pulmonary function testing.
Dust exposure can be reduced by the use of exhaust hoods,
general increases in ventilation, and wetting procedures, but

respiratory protective equipment may be required during certain
operations. Regular surveillance of pulmonary function in cotton
dust–exposed workers using spirometry before and after the
workshift is required by OSHA. All workers with persistent symptoms
or significantly reduced levels of pulmonary function should be
moved to areas of lower risk of exposure.
Grain Dust Worldwide, many farmers and workers in grain storage
facilities are exposed to grain dust. The presentation of obstructive
airway disease in grain dust–exposed workers is virtually identical to
the characteristic findings in cigarette smokers, i.e., persistent
cough, mucus hypersecretion, wheeze and dyspnea on exertion, and
reduced FEV1 and FEV1/FVC (forced vital capacity) ratio (Chap.
285).
Dust concentrations in grain elevators vary greatly but can be
>10,000 μg/m3 with many particles in the respirable size range. The
effect of grain dust exposure is additive to that of cigarette smoking,
with ∼50% of workers who smoke having symptoms. Smoking grain
dust–exposed workers are more likely to have obstructive ventilatory
deficits on pulmonary function testing. As in byssinosis, endotoxin
may play a role in grain dust–induced chronic bronchitis and COPD.
Farmer’s Lung This condition results from exposure to moldy hay
containing spores of thermophilic actinomycetes that produce a
hypersensitivity pneumonitis (Chap. 288). A patient with acute
farmer’s lung presents 4–8 h after exposure with fever, chills,
malaise, cough, and dyspnea without wheezing. The history of
exposure is obviously essential to distinguish this disease from
influenza or pneumonia with similar symptoms. In the chronic form of
the disease, the history of repeated attacks after similar exposure is
important in differentiating this syndrome from other causes of
patchy fibrosis (e.g., sarcoidosis).
A wide variety of other organic dusts are associated with the
occurrence of hypersensitivity pneumonitis (Chap. 288). For patients
who present with hypersensitivity pneumonitis, specific and careful
inquiry about occupations, hobbies, and other home environmental
exposures is necessary to uncover the source of the etiologic agent.

■ TOXIC CHEMICALS
Exposure to toxic chemicals affecting the lung generally involves
gases and vapors. A common accident is one in which the victim is
trapped in a confined space where the chemicals have accumulated
to harmful levels. In addition to the specific toxic effects of the
chemical, the victim often sustains considerable anoxia, which can
play a dominant role in determining whether the individual survives.
Table 289-2 lists a variety of toxic agents that can produce acute
and sometimes life-threatening reactions in the lung. All these
agents in sufficient concentrations have been demonstrated, at least
in animal studies, to affect the lower airways and disrupt alveolar
architecture, either acutely or as a result of chronic exposure.
TABLE 289-2 Selected Common Toxic Chemical Agents That
Affect the Lung

Firefighters and fire victims are at risk of smoke inhalation, an
important cause of acute cardiorespiratory failure. Smoke inhalation
kills more fire victims than does thermal injury. Carbon monoxide
poisoning with resulting significant hypoxemia can be life-threatening
(Chap. 459). Synthetic materials (plastic, polyurethanes), when
burned, may release a variety of other toxic agents (such as cyanide
and hydrochloric acid), and this must be considered in evaluating
smoke inhalation victims. Exposed victims may have some degree of
lower respiratory tract inflammation and/or pulmonary edema.
Exposure to certain highly reactive, low-molecular-weight agents
used in the manufacture of synthetic polymers, paints, and coatings
(diisocyanates in polyurethanes, aromatic amines and acid
anhydrides in epoxies) is associated with a high risk of occupational
asthma. Although this occupational asthma manifests clinically as if
sensitization has occurred, an IgE antibody–mediated mechanism is
not necessarily involved. Hypersensitivity pneumonitis–like reactions
also have been described in diisocyanate and acid anhydride–
exposed workers.
Fluoropolymers such as Teflon, which at normal temperatures
produce no reaction, become volatilized upon heating. The inhaled
agents cause a characteristic syndrome of fever, chills, malaise, and
occasionally mild wheezing, leading to the diagnosis of polymer
fume fever. A similar self-limited, influenza-like syndrome—metal
fume fever—results from acute exposure to fumes containing zinc
oxide, typically from welding of galvanized steel. These inhalational
fever syndromes may begin several hours after work and resolve
within 24 h, only to return on repeated exposure.
Two other agents have been associated with potentially severe
lung disease. Occupational exposure to nylon flock has been shown
to induce a lymphocytic bronchiolitis, and workers exposed to
diacetyl, which is used to provide “butter” flavor in the manufacture of
microwave popcorn and other foods, have developed bronchiolitis
obliterans (Chap. 293).
World Trade Center Disaster A consequence of the attack on the
World Trade Center (WTC) on September 11, 2001, was relatively
heavy exposure of a large number of firefighters and other rescue

workers to the dust generated by the collapse of the buildings.
Environmental monitoring and chemical characterization of WTC
dust have revealed a wide variety of potentially toxic constituents,
although much of the dust was pulverized cement. Possibly because
of the high alkalinity of WTC dust, significant cough, wheeze, and
phlegm production occurred among firefighters and cleanup crews.
New cough and wheeze syndromes also occurred among local
residents. Heavier exposure to WTC dust among New York City
firefighters was associated with accelerated decline of lung function
over the first year after the disaster. More recently, concerns have
been raised about risk of interstitial lung disease, especially of a
granulomatous nature.
■ OCCUPATIONAL RESPIRATORY CARCINOGENS
Exposures at work have been estimated to contribute to 10% of all
lung cancer cases. In addition to asbestos, other agents either
proven or suspected to be respiratory carcinogens include
acrylonitrile, arsenic compounds, beryllium, bis(chloromethyl) ether,
chromium (hexavalent), formaldehyde (nasal), isopropanol (nasal
sinuses), mustard gas, nickel carbonyl (nickel smelting), polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons (coke oven emissions and diesel exhaust),
secondhand tobacco smoke, silica (both mining and processing), talc
(possible asbestos contamination in both mining and milling), vinyl
chloride (sarcomas), wood (nasal), and uranium. Workers at risk of
radiation-related lung cancer include not only those involved in
mining or processing uranium but also those exposed in
underground mining operations of other ores where radon daughters
may be emitted from rock formations.
■ ASSESSMENT OF DISABILITY
Disability is the term used to describe the decreased ability to work
due to the effects of a medical condition. Physicians are generally
able to assess physiologic dysfunction, or impairment, but the rating
of disability for compensation of loss of income also involves
nonmedical factors such as the education and employability of the
individual. The disability rating scheme differs with the

compensation-granting agency. For example, the U.S. Social
Security Administration requires that an individual be unable to do
any work (i.e., total disability) before he or she will receive income
replacement payments. Many state workers’ compensation systems
allow for payments for partial disability. In the Social Security
scheme, no determination of cause is done, whereas workrelatedness must be established in workers’ compensation systems.
For respiratory impairment rating, resting pulmonary function
tests (spirometry and diffusing capacity) are used as the initial
assessment tool, with cardiopulmonary exercise testing (to assess
maximal oxygen consumption) used if the results of the resting tests
do not correlate with the patient’s symptoms. Methacholine
challenge (to assess airway reactivity) can also be useful in patients
with asthma who have normal spirometry when evaluated. Some
compensation agencies (e.g., Social Security) have proscribed
disability classification schemes based on pulmonary function test
results. When no specific scheme is proscribed, the Guidelines of
the American Medical Association should be used.

GENERAL ENVIRONMENTAL EXPOSURES
■ OUTDOOR AIR POLLUTION
Primary standards regulated by the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) designed to protect the public health with an adequate
margin of safety exist for sulfur dioxide, particulate matter (PM),
nitrogen dioxide, ozone, lead, and carbon monoxide. Standards for
each of these pollutants are updated regularly through an extensive
review process conducted by the EPA. (For details on current
standards, go to https://www.epa.gov/criteria-air-pollutants/naaqstable).
Pollutants are generated from both stationary sources (power
plants and industrial facilities) and mobile sources (motor vehicles),
and none of the regulated pollutants occurs in isolation. Furthermore,
pollutants may be changed by chemical reactions after being
emitted. For example, sulfur dioxide and PM emissions from a coalfired power plant may react in air to produce acid sulfate aerosols,
which can be transported long distances in the atmosphere. Oxides

of nitrogen and volatile organic compounds from automobile exhaust
react with sunlight to produce ozone. Although originally recognized
in Los Angeles, photochemically derived pollution (“smog”) is now
known to be a problem throughout the United States and in many
other countries. Both acute and chronic effects of pollutant
exposures have been documented in large population studies.
The symptoms and diseases associated with air pollution are the
same as conditions commonly associated with cigarette smoking. In
addition, decreased growth of lung function and asthma have been
associated with chronic exposure to only modestly elevated levels of
traffic-related air pollution. Multiple population-based time-series
studies within cities have demonstrated excess health care utilization
for asthma and other cardiopulmonary conditions as well as
increased mortality rates. Cohort studies comparing cities that have
relatively high levels of particulate exposures with less polluted
communities suggest excess morbidity and mortality rates from
cardiopulmonary conditions in long-term residents of the former. The
strong epidemiologic evidence that fine PM is a risk factor for
cardiovascular morbidity and mortality has prompted toxicologic
investigations into the underlying mechanisms. The inhalation of fine
particles from combustion sources generates oxidative stress
followed by local injury and inflammation in the lungs that in turn lead
to autonomic and systemic inflammatory responses. Recent
research findings on the health effects of air pollutants have led to
stricter U.S. ambient air quality standards for ozone, oxides of
nitrogen, and PM as well as greater emphasis on publicizing
pollution alerts to encourage individuals with cardiovascular and
respiratory disorders to stay indoors during high-pollution episodes
(e.g., from wildfires).
■ INDOOR EXPOSURES
Secondhand tobacco smoke (Chap. 454), radon gas, wood smoke,
and other biologic agents generated indoors must be considered.
Several studies have shown that the respirable particulate load in
any household is directly proportional to the number of cigarette
smokers living in that home. Increases in prevalence of respiratory
illnesses, especially asthma, and reduced levels of pulmonary

function have been found in the children of smoking parents in a
number of studies. Recent meta-analyses for lung cancer and
cardiopulmonary diseases, combining data from multiple
secondhand tobacco smoke epidemiologic studies, suggest an
∼25% increase in relative risk for each condition, even after
adjustment for major potential confounders.
Exposure to radon gas in homes is a risk factor for lung cancer.
The main radon product (radon-222) is a gas that results from the
decay series of uranium-238, with the immediate precursor being
radium-226. The amount of radium in earth materials determines
how much radon gas will be emitted. Levels associated with excess
lung cancer risk may be present in as many as 10% of the houses in
the United States. When smokers reside in the home, the problem is
potentially greater, because the molecular size of radon particles
allows them to attach readily to smoke particles that are inhaled.
Fortunately, technology is available for assessing and reducing the
level of exposure.
Other indoor exposures of concern are bioaerosols that contain
antigenic material (fungi, cockroaches, dust mites, and pet danders)
associated with an increased risk of atopy and asthma. Indoor
chemical agents include strong cleaning agents (bleach, ammonia),
formaldehyde, perfumes, pesticides, and oxides of nitrogen from gas
appliances. Nonspecific responses associated with “tight-building
syndrome,” perhaps better termed “building-associated illness,” in
which no particular agent has been implicated, have included a wide
variety of complaints, among them respiratory symptoms that are
relieved only by avoiding exposure in the building in question. The
degree to which “smells” and other sensory stimuli are involved in
the triggering of potentially incapacitating psychological or physical
responses has yet to be determined, and the long-term
consequences of such environmental exposures are unknown.
Indoor exposure to household air pollution from cooking or
heating with solid fuels (wood, dung, crop residues, charcoal, coal) is
estimated to be responsible for ∼2.7% of worldwide disabilityadjusted life-years (DALYs) lost, due to acute lower respiratory
infections in children, COPD and lung cancer in women, and
cardiovascular disease among men. This burden of disease places

exposure to household air pollution as one of the leading
environmental hazards for poor health on a global scale.
Forty percent of the world’s population uses solid fuel for cooking,
heating, or baking. Kerosene (similar to diesel fuel) is often used for
lighting and sometimes cooking. This occurs predominantly in the
rural areas of developing countries. Because many families burn
coal or biomass fuels in open stoves, which are highly inefficient,
and inside homes with poor ventilation, women and young children
are exposed on a daily basis to high levels of smoke. In these
homes, 24-h mean levels of fine PM have been reported to be 2–30
times higher than the National Ambient Air Quality Standard set by
the U.S. EPA.
Epidemiologic studies have consistently shown associations
between exposure to biomass smoke and both chronic bronchitis
and COPD. Because of increased migration to the United States
from developing countries, clinicians need to be aware of the chronic
respiratory effects of exposure to biomass smoke, which can include
interstitial lung disease (Fig. 289-4). Evidence is beginning to
emerge that improved stoves that reduce biomass smoke exposure
can reduce risk of respiratory illness in both children and adults.

FIGURE 289-4 Histopathologic features of biomass smoke–induced
interstitial lung disease. A. Anthracitic pigment is seen accumulating along
alveolar septae (arrowheads) and within a pigmented dust macule (single arrow).

B. A high-power photomicrograph contains a mixture of fibroblasts and carbonladen macrophages.

Household air pollution (HAP) from domestic use of solid fuels
also contributes substantially to outdoor air pollution. Contributions
from HAP, coal-fired power plants without emission scrubbers, and
increased traffic congestion involving motor vehicles without pollution
controls can lead to high concentrations of outdoor air pollution,
especially fine PM, in mega-cities in developing countries (e.g.,
Delhi).


290 Bronchiectasis Rebecca M. Baron, Beverly W. Baron, Miriam Baron Barshak
Bronchiectasis refers to an irreversible airway dilation that involves
the lung in either a focal or a diffuse manner and that classically has
been categorized as cylindrical or tubular (the most common form),
varicose, or cystic. This chapter will focus largely on non–cystic
fibrosis (CF) bronchiectasis. The reader is referred to Chapter 291
for a more focused discussion on CF bronchiectasis.
■ ETIOLOGY
Bronchiectasis can arise from infectious or noninfectious causes
(Table 290-1). Clues to the underlying etiology often are provided by
the pattern of lung involvement. Focal bronchiectasis refers to
bronchiectatic changes in a localized area of the lung and can be a
consequence of obstruction of the airway—either extrinsic (e.g., due
to compression by adjacent lymphadenopathy or parenchymal tumor
mass) or intrinsic (e.g., due to an airway tumor or aspirated foreign
body, a scarred/stenotic airway, or bronchial atresia from congenital
underdevelopment of the airway). Diffuse bronchiectasis is
characterized by widespread bronchiectatic changes throughout the
lung and often arises from an underlying systemic or infectious
disease process.
TABLE 290-1 Major Etiologies of Bronchiectasis and Proposed
Workup

More pronounced involvement of the upper lung fields is most
common in CF and also is observed in postradiation fibrosis,
corresponding to the lung region encompassed by the radiation port.
Bronchiectasis with predominant involvement of the lower lung fields
usually has its source in chronic recurrent aspiration (e.g., due to
esophageal motility disorders like those in scleroderma), end-stage
fibrotic lung disease (e.g., traction bronchiectasis from idiopathic
pulmonary fibrosis), or recurrent immunodeficiency-associated
infections (e.g., hypogammaglobulinemia). Bronchiectasis resulting
from infection by nontuberculous mycobacteria (NTM), most
commonly the Mycobacterium avium-intracellulare complex (MAC),
often preferentially affects the midlung fields. Congenital causes of
bronchiectasis with predominant midlung field involvement include
the dyskinetic/immotile cilia syndrome. Finally, predominant
involvement of the central airways is reported in association with
allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA), in which an
immune-mediated reaction to Aspergillus damages the bronchial
wall. Congenital causes of central airway–predominant
bronchiectasis resulting from cartilage deficiency include
tracheobronchomegaly (Mounier-Kuhn syndrome) and WilliamsCampbell syndrome.
In many cases, the etiology of bronchiectasis is not determined.
In case series, as many as 25–50% of patients referred for
bronchiectasis have idiopathic disease.
■ EPIDEMIOLOGY
The overall reported prevalence of bronchiectasis in the United
States has recently increased, but the epidemiology of
bronchiectasis varies greatly with the underlying etiology. For
example, patients born with CF often develop significant clinical
bronchiectasis in late adolescence or early adulthood, although
atypical presentations of CF in adults in their thirties and forties are
also possible. In contrast, bronchiectasis resulting from MAC
infection classically affects nonsmoking women >50 years of age. In

general, the incidence of bronchiectasis increases with age.
Bronchiectasis is more common among women than among men.
Bronchiectasis may also frequently be co-diagnosed with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) or asthma.
In areas where tuberculosis is prevalent, bronchiectasis more
frequently occurs as a sequela of granulomatous infection. Focal
bronchiectasis can arise from extrinsic compression of the airway by
enlarged granulomatous lymph nodes and/or from development of
intrinsic obstruction as a result of erosion of a calcified lymph node
through the airway wall (e.g., broncholithiasis). Especially in
reactivated tuberculosis, parenchymal destruction from infection can
result in areas of more diffuse bronchiectasis. Apart from cases
associated with tuberculosis, an increased incidence of non-CF
bronchiectasis with an unclear underlying mechanism has been
reported as a significant problem in developing nations. It has been
suggested that the high incidence of malnutrition in certain areas
may predispose to immune dysfunction and development of
bronchiectasis.
■ PATHOGENESIS AND PATHOLOGY
The most widely cited mechanism of infectious bronchiectasis is the
“vicious cycle hypothesis,” in which susceptibility to infection and
poor mucociliary clearance result in microbial colonization of the
bronchial tree. Some organisms, such as Pseudomonas aeruginosa,
exhibit a particular propensity for colonizing damaged airways and
evading host defense mechanisms. Impaired mucociliary clearance
can result from inherited conditions such as CF or dyskinetic cilia
syndrome, and it has been proposed that a single severe infection
(e.g., pneumonia caused by Bordetella pertussis or Mycoplasma
pneumoniae) can result in significant airway damage and poor
secretion clearance. The presence of the microbes incites continued
chronic inflammation, with consequent damage to the airway wall,
continued impairment of secretions and microbial clearance, and
ongoing propagation of the infectious/inflammatory cycle. Moreover,
it has been proposed that mediators released directly from bacteria
can interfere with mucociliary clearance.

Classic studies of the pathology of bronchiectasis from the 1950s
demonstrated significant small-airway wall inflammation and largerairway wall destruction as well as dilation, with loss of elastin,
smooth muscle, and cartilage. It has been proposed that
inflammatory cells in the small airways release proteases and other
mediators, such as reactive oxygen species and proinflammatory
cytokines, that damage the larger airway walls. Furthermore, the
ongoing inflammatory process in the smaller airways results in
airflow obstruction. It is thought that antiproteases, such as α1
antitrypsin, play an important role in neutralizing the damaging
effects of neutrophil elastase and in enhancing bacterial killing.
Bronchiectasis and emphysema have been observed in patients with
α1 antitrypsin deficiency.
Proposed mechanisms for noninfectious bronchiectasis include
immune-mediated reactions that damage the bronchial wall (e.g.,
those associated with systemic autoimmune conditions such as
Sjögren’s syndrome and rheumatoid arthritis). Recent studies
suggest that there might exist a new bronchiectasis endophenotype
of patients with sensitization to multiple environmental allergens.
Traction bronchiectasis refers to dilated airways arising from
parenchymal distortion as a result of lung fibrosis (e.g., postradiation
fibrosis or idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis).
■ CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
The most common clinical presentation is a persistent productive
cough with ongoing production of thick, tenacious sputum. Physical
findings frequently include crackles and wheezing on lung
auscultation, and some patients with bronchiectasis exhibit clubbing
of the digits. Mild to moderate airflow obstruction often is detected on
pulmonary function tests, overlapping with that seen at presentation
with other conditions, such as COPD. Acute exacerbations of
bronchiectasis usually are characterized by changes in the nature of
sputum production, with increased volume and purulence. However,
typical signs and symptoms of lung infection, such as fever and new
infiltrates, may not be present.

■ DIAGNOSIS
The diagnosis usually is based on presentation with a persistent
chronic cough and sputum production accompanied by consistent
radiographic features. Although chest radiographs lack sensitivity,
the presence of “tram tracks” indicating dilated airways is consistent
with bronchiectasis. Chest CT is more specific for bronchiectasis and
is the imaging modality of choice for confirming the diagnosis. CT
findings include airway dilation (detected as parallel “tram tracks” or
as the “signet-ring sign”—a cross-sectional area of the airway with a
diameter at least 1.5 times that of the adjacent vessel), lack of
bronchial tapering (including the presence of tubular structures within
1 cm from the pleural surface), bronchial wall thickening in dilated
airways, inspissated secretions (e.g., the “tree-in-bud” pattern), or
cysts emanating from the bronchial wall (especially pronounced in
cystic bronchiectasis) (Fig. 290-1).

FIGURE 290-1 Representative chest CT image of severe bronchiectasis. This
patient’s CT demonstrates many severely dilated airways, seen both longitudinally
(arrowhead) and in cross-section (arrow).

APPROACH TO THE PATIENT

Bronchiectasis
The evaluation of a patient with bronchiectasis entails elicitation of
a clinical history, chest imaging, and a workup to determine the
underlying etiology. Evaluation of focal bronchiectasis almost
always requires bronchoscopy to exclude airway obstruction by an
underlying mass or foreign body. A workup for diffuse
bronchiectasis includes analysis for the major etiologies (Table
290-1), with an initial focus on excluding CF. Pulmonary function
testing is an important component of a functional assessment of
the patient.
TREATMENT

Bronchiectasis
Treatment of infectious bronchiectasis is directed at the control of
active infection and improvements in secretion clearance and
bronchial hygiene so as to decrease the microbial load within the
airways and minimize the risk of repeated infections.
ANTIBIOTIC TREATMENT
Antibiotics targeting the causative or presumptive pathogen (with
Haemophilus influenzae and P. aeruginosa isolated commonly)
should be administered in acute exacerbations, usually for a
minimum of 7–10 days and perhaps for as long as 14 days.
Decisions about treatment of NTM infection can be difficult, given
that these organisms can be colonizers as well as pathogens and
the prolonged treatment course often is not well tolerated.
Consensus guidelines have advised that diagnostic criteria for true
clinical infection with NTM should be considered in patients with
symptoms and radiographic findings of lung disease who have at
least two sputum samples positive on culture; at least one
bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid sample positive on culture; a
biopsy sample displaying histopathologic features of NTM infection

(e.g., granuloma or a positive stain for acid-fast bacilli) along with
one positive sputum culture; or a pleural fluid sample (or a sample
from another sterile extrapulmonary site) positive on culture. MAC
strains are the most common NTM pathogens, and the
recommended regimen for HIV-negative patients infected with
macrolide-sensitive MAC includes a macrolide combined with
rifampin and ethambutol. Consensus guidelines recommend
macrolide susceptibility testing for clinically significant MAC isolates.
BRONCHIAL HYGIENE
The numerous approaches used to enhance secretion clearance in
bronchiectasis include hydration and mucolytic administration,
aerosolization of bronchodilators and hyperosmolar agents (e.g.,
hypertonic saline), and chest physiotherapy (e.g., postural drainage,
traditional mechanical chest percussion via hand clapping to the
chest, or use of devices such as an oscillatory positive expiratory
pressure flutter valve or a high-frequency chest wall oscillation
vest). Pulmonary rehabilitation and a regular exercise program may
assist with secretion clearance as well as with other aspects of
bronchiectasis, including improved exercise capacity and quality of
life. The mucolytic dornase (DNase) is recommended routinely in
CF-related bronchiectasis but not in non-CF bronchiectasis, given
concerns about lack of efficacy and potential harm in the non-CF
population.
ANTI-INFLAMMATORY THERAPY
It has been proposed that control of the inflammatory response may
be of benefit in bronchiectasis, and relatively small-scale trials have
yielded evidence of alleviated dyspnea, decreased need for inhaled
β-agonists, and reduced sputum production with inhaled
glucocorticoids. However, no significant differences in lung function
or bronchiectasis exacerbation rates have been observed. Risks of
immunosuppression and adrenal suppression must be carefully
considered with use of anti-inflammatory therapy in infectious
bronchiectasis. Nevertheless, administration of oral/systemic
glucocorticoids may be important in treatment of bronchiectasis due
to certain etiologies, such as ABPA, or of noninfectious

bronchiectasis due to underlying conditions, especially that in which
an autoimmune condition is believed to be active (e.g., rheumatoid
arthritis or Sjögren’s syndrome). Patients with ABPA also may
benefit from a prolonged course of treatment with the oral antifungal
agent itraconazole.
REFRACTORY CASES
In select cases, surgery can be considered, with resection of a focal
area of suppuration. In advanced cases, lung transplantation can be
considered.
■ COMPLICATIONS
In more severe cases of infectious bronchiectasis, recurrent
infections and repeated courses of antibiotics can lead to microbial
resistance to antibiotics. In certain cases, combinations of antibiotics
that have independent toxicity profiles may be necessary to treat
resistant organisms.
Recurrent infections can result in injury to superficial mucosal
vessels, with bleeding and, in severe cases, life-threatening
hemoptysis. Management of massive hemoptysis usually requires
intubation to stabilize the patient, identification of the source of
bleeding, and protection of the nonbleeding lung. Control of bleeding
often necessitates bronchial artery embolization and, in severe
cases, surgery.
■ PROGNOSIS
Outcomes of bronchiectasis can vary widely with the underlying
etiology and comorbid conditions and also may be influenced by the
frequency of exacerbations and (in infectious cases) the specific
pathogens involved (with worse outcomes associated with P.
aeruginosa colonization). Increasing attention is being given to
defining clinical subphenotypes of bronchiectasis in light of
heterogeneous clinical, radiographic, and microbial features and to
developing screening tools for the assessment of quality of life and
disease severity. In one study, the decline of lung function in patients
with non-CF bronchiectasis was similar to that in patients with

COPD, with the forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) declining by
50–55 mL per year as opposed to 20–30 mL per year for healthy
controls.
■ PREVENTION
Reversal of an underlying immunodeficient state (e.g., by
administration of gamma globulin for immunoglobulin-deficient
patients) and vaccination of patients with chronic respiratory
conditions (e.g., influenza and pneumococcal vaccines) can
decrease the risk of recurrent infections. Patients who smoke should
be counseled about smoking cessation.
After resolution of an acute infection in patients with recurrences
(e.g., ≥3 episodes per year), the use of suppressive antibiotics to
minimize the microbial load and reduce the frequency of
exacerbations has been proposed. Although there is less consensus
about this approach in non-CF-associated bronchiectasis than in CFrelated bronchiectasis, small studies have supported benefits of
selected therapies. Possible suppressive treatments include (1)
administration of an oral antibiotic (e.g., ciprofloxacin) daily for 1–2
weeks per month; (2) use of a rotating schedule of oral antibiotics (to
minimize the risk of development of drug resistance); (3)
administration of a macrolide antibiotic (see below) daily or three
times per week (with mechanisms of possible benefit related to nonantimicrobial properties, such as anti-inflammatory effects and
reduction of gram-negative bacillary biofilms); (4) inhalation of
aerosolized antibiotics (e.g., tobramycin inhalation solution) for select
patients on a rotating schedule (e.g., 30 days on, 30 days off), with
the goal of decreasing the microbial load without eliciting the side
effects of systemic drug administration; other studies examining
inhaled aztreonam and inhaled ciprofloxacin formulations have
shown conflicting results, suggesting there might be subpopulations
of patients with bronchiectasis who might benefit from specific
therapies; and (5) intermittent administration of IV antibiotics (e.g.,
“clean-outs”) for patients with more severe bronchiectasis and/or
resistant pathogens. In relation to macrolide therapy (point 3 above),
a number of double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized trials have
been published in non-CF bronchiectasis and support a benefit of

long-term macrolides (6–12 months of azithromycin or erythromycin)
in decreasing rates of bronchiectasis exacerbation, mucus
production, and decline in lung function. However, two of these
studies and a meta-analysis also reported increased macrolide
resistance in commensal pathogens, dampening enthusiasm for
universal use of macrolides in this setting and raising the question of
whether there might be select non-CF bronchiectasis patients with
higher morbidity for whom benefits of long-term macrolides might
outweigh the risks of emergence of antibiotic resistance. In
particular, development of macrolide-resistant NTM is a potential
concern, making treatment of those pathogens much more difficult.
Furthermore, patients with different patterns of microbial colonization
may not all experience similar benefits with macrolide therapy.
Therefore, before chronic macrolide therapy is considered, it is
advisable to rule out NTM infection and carefully consider each
patient’s scenario closely, obtaining an electrocardiogram to rule out
a prolonged QT interval that might place the patient at increased risk
of arrhythmias.
In addition, ongoing consistent attention to bronchial hygiene can
promote secretion clearance and decrease the microbial load in the
airways.

291 Cystic Fibrosis Eric J. Sorscher

■ CLINICAL FEATURES
Cystic fibrosis (CF) is an autosomal recessive exocrinopathy
affecting multiple epithelial tissues. The gene product responsible for
CF (the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator
[CFTR]) serves as an anion channel in the apical (luminal) plasma
membranes of epithelial cells and regulates volume and composition
of exocrine secretion. An increasingly sophisticated understanding of
CFTR molecular genetics and membrane protein biochemistry has
facilitated CF drug discovery, with a number of recently approved
agents that have transformed the clinical outlook for many with the
disease.
Respiratory Manifestations The major morbidity and mortality
associated with CF is attributable to pulmonary compromise,
characterized by copious hyperviscous and adherent secretions that
obstruct small and medium-sized airways. CF respiratory secretions
are exceedingly difficult to clear, and a complex bacterial flora that
includes Staphylococcus aureus, Haemophilus influenzae, and
Pseudomonas aeruginosa (among other pathogens, see below) is
routinely cultured from CF sputum. Microbiome analysis has
identified dozens of other bacterial species in CF lungs, although a
relationship of these less well-characterized organisms to disease
progression has not been determined. Robust pulmonary
inflammation in the setting of inspissated mucus and chronic
bacterial infection leads to collateral tissue injury and further
aggravates respiratory decline. Organisms such as P. aeruginosa
exhibit a stereotypic mode of pathogenesis; a sentinel and early
colonization event often engenders lifelong pulmonary infection by
the same genetic strain. Over a period of many years, P. aeruginosa
evolves in CF lungs to adopt a mucoid phenotype (attributable to

release of alginate exoproduct) that confers selective advantage for
the pathogen and poor prognosis for the host.
Pancreatic Findings The complete name of the disease, cystic
fibrosis of the pancreas, refers to profound tissue destruction of the
exocrine pancreas, with fibrotic scarring and/or fatty replacement,
cyst formation, loss of acinar tissue, and ablation of normal
pancreatic architecture. As in the lung, tenacious exocrine secretions
(sometimes termed concretions) obstruct pancreatic ducts and
impair production and flow of digestive enzymes to the duodenum.
The sequelae of exocrine pancreatic insufficiency include chronic
malabsorption, poor growth, fat-soluble vitamin insufficiency, high
levels of blood immunoreactive trypsinogen (a test used in newborn
screening), and loss of pancreatic islet cell mass. CF-related
diabetes mellitus is a manifestation in >30% of adults with the
disease and likely multifactorial in nature (attributable to progressive
destruction/dysfunction of the endocrine pancreas and, in some
cases, insulin resistance or other features).
Additional Organ System Damage As in CF lung and pancreas,
thick and inspissated secretions compromise numerous exocrine
tissues. Obstruction of intrahepatic bile ducts and parenchymal
fibrosis are commonly observed in pathologic specimens, with
multilobular cirrhosis in 4–15% of patients with CF and significant
hepatic insufficiency as a resulting manifestation among many
adults. Contents of the intestinal lumen are often difficult to excrete,
leading to meconium ileus (a presentation in 10–20% of newborns
with CF) or distal intestinal obstructive syndrome in older individuals.
Men typically exhibit complete involution of the vas deferens and
infertility (despite functioning spermatogenesis), and ∼99% of males
with CF are infertile. The etiology of this dramatic anatomic defect in
the male genitourinary system is not understood but may represent a
developmental abnormality secondary to improper epithelial
secretion in the vas or associated structures. Males with CF can
conceive children through in vitro fertilization. Abnormalities of
female reproductive tract secretions are likely contributors to a
higher incidence of infertility among women with the disease.

Radiographic evidence of sinusitis occurs in most patients with CF
and is associated with organisms similar to those recovered from
lower airways, suggesting the sinus may serve as a reservoir for
bacterial seeding.
■ PATHOGENESIS
Cystic Fibrosis Transmembrane Conductance Regulator CFTR
is an integral membrane protein that functions as an epithelial anion
channel. The ∼1480-amino-acid molecule encodes a passive
conduit for chloride and bicarbonate transport across plasma
membranes of epithelial tissues, with direction of ion flow dependent
on the electrochemical driving force. Gating of CFTR involves
conformational cycling between an open and closed configuration
and is augmented by hydrolysis of adenosine triphosphate (ATP).
Anion flux mediated by CFTR does not involve active transport
against a concentration gradient but utilizes the energy provided
from ATP hydrolysis as a central feature of ion channel
mechanochemistry and gating.
CFTR is situated in the apical plasma membranes of acinar and
other epithelial cells where it regulates the amount and composition
of secretion by exocrine glands. In numerous epithelia, chloride and
bicarbonate release via CFTR is followed passively by flow of water
through other pathways, aiding mobilization and clearance of
exocrine products. Along respiratory mucosa, CFTR is necessary to
provide sufficient depth of the periciliary fluid layer (PCL), allowing
normal ciliary extension and mucociliary transport. CFTR-deficient
airway cells exhibit depleted PCL, causing ciliary collapse and failure
to clear overlying mucus (Video 291-1). In airway submucosal
glands, CFTR is expressed in acini and may participate both in the
formation of mucus and extrusion of glandular secretion onto the
airway surface (Fig. 291-1). In other exocrine glands characterized
by abrogated mucus transport (e.g., pancreatic acini and ducts, as
well as bile canaliculi, and intestinal secretions), similar pathogenic
mechanisms have been implicated. In these tissues, a driving force
for apical chloride and/or bicarbonate secretion is believed to
promote CFTR-mediated fluid and electrolyte release into the lumen,
which confers proper rheology of mucins and other exocrine

products. Failure of this mechanism disrupts normal hydration and
transport of glandular secretion and is widely viewed as a proximate
cause of obstruction, with concomitant tissue injury.

Pulmonary Inflammation and Remodeling The CF airway is
characterized by an aggressive, unrelenting, neutrophilic
inflammatory response with release of proteases and oxidants
leading to airway remodeling and bronchiectasis. Intense pulmonary
inflammation is largely driven by chronic respiratory infection.
Macrophages and other cells resident in CF lungs augment
elaboration of proinflammatory cytokines, which contribute to innate
and adaptive immune reactivity. CFTR-dependent abnormalities of
airway surface fluid composition (e.g., pH) have been reported as
contributors to impaired bacterial killing in CF lungs. The role of
CFTR as a direct mediator of inflammatory responsiveness and/or

pulmonary remodeling represents an important and topical area of
investigation.
■ MOLECULAR GENETICS
DNA sequencing of CFTR from patients (and others) worldwide has
revealed >1600 allelic mutations; several hundred of these have
been well characterized as disease-causing variants. Distinguishing
the single nucleotide transversions or other polymorphisms with
causal relevance can sometimes present a significant challenge. The
CFTR2 resource (www.cftr2.org/) helps delineate gene variants with
a clear etiologic role.
CFTR defects known to elicit disease are often categorized
based on molecular mechanism. For example, the common F508del
mutation (nomenclature denotes omission of a single phenylalanine
residue [F] at CFTR position 508) leads to a folding abnormality
recognized by cellular quality control pathways. CFTR encoding
F508del retains partial ion channel function, but protein maturation is
arrested in the endoplasmic reticulum, and CFTR fails to arrive at the
plasma membrane. Instead, F508del CFTR is misrouted and
undergoes endoplasmic reticulum–associated degradation via the
proteasome. CFTR mutations that disrupt protein maturation are
termed class II defects and are by far the most common genetic
abnormalities. F508del alone accounts for ∼70% of defective CFTR
alleles in the United States, where ∼90% of individuals with CF carry
at least one F508del mutation. (See Video 291-1).
Other gene defects include CFTR ion channels properly trafficked
to the apical cell surface but unable to open and/or gate. Such
channel proteins include G551D (a glycine to aspartic acid
replacement at CFTR position 551), which leads to an inability to
transport Cl− or HCO3− (a class III abnormality). Individuals with at
least one G551D allele represent ∼4% of patients with CF. CFTR
nonsense mutations such as G542X, R553X, or W1282X (premature
termination codon replaces glycine, arginine, or tryptophan at
positions 542, 553, or 1282, respectively) are among the common
class I defects, in addition to large deletions or other major
disruptions of the gene. The W1282X mutation, for example, is

prevalent among individuals of Ashkenazi descent and a
predominant CF genotype in Israel. Additional categories of CFTR
mutation include defects in the ion channel pore (class IV), RNA
splicing (class V), and increased plasma membrane turnover (class
VI) (Fig. 291-2).


■ DIAGNOSIS
During the past decade, newborn screening has led to most CF
diagnoses, with confirmation through CFTR mutation analysis and
sweat electrolyte measurements as cardinal tests. DNA-based
evaluation typically surveys numerous disease-associated
mutations; panels that identify up to ∼330 CFTR variants are
available through a variety of public health laboratories or
commercial sources. For difficult cases, complete CFTR exonic
sequencing together with analysis of splice junctions and key
regulatory elements can be obtained.
Sweat electrolytes following pilocarpine iontophoresis continue to
comprise an essential diagnostic element, with levels of chloride
markedly elevated in CF compared to non-CF individuals. The sweat
test result is highly specific and served as a mainstay of diagnosis
for many decades prior to availability of CFTR genotyping. Notably,
hyperviscosity of eccrine sweat is not a clinical feature of the
disease. Sweat ducts function to reabsorb chloride from a primary
sweat secretion produced by the glandular coil. Malfunction of CFTR
leads to diminished chloride uptake from the ductular lumen, and
sweat emerges on the skin with elevated levels of chloride. For the
unusual situation in which both CFTR genotype and sweat
electrolytes are inconclusive, in vivo measurement of ion transport
across the nasal airways can serve as a specific test for CF and is
used by a number of referral centers. For example, elevated
(sodium-dependent) transepithelial charge separation across airway
epithelial tissue and persistent failure of isoproterenol-dependent
chloride secretion (via CFTR) represent bioelectric findings specific
for the disease. Measurements of CFTR activity in excised rectal
mucosal biopsies can also be obtained.
■ COMPLEXITY OF A CF PHENOTYPE
Prior to the advent of newborn screening, CF classically presented in
childhood with chronic productive cough, malabsorption including
steatorrhea, and failure to thrive. The disease is most common

among whites (∼1 in 3300 live births) and much less frequent among
African-American (∼1 in 10,000) or Asian populations (∼1 in 33,000).
Several “severe” defects that impair CFTR activity (including
F508del, G551D, and truncation alleles) are predictive of pancreatic
insufficiency, which is clinically evident in ∼90% of individuals with
the disease. These few genotype-phenotype correlations
notwithstanding, genotype is, in general, a poor predictor of overall
respiratory prognosis.
A spectrum of CFTR-related conditions with features resembling
classic CF has been well described. In addition to multiorgan
involvement, forme frustes, such as isolated congenital bilateral
absence of the vas deferens or pancreatitis (without other organ
system findings), are strongly associated with CFTR mutations in at
least one allele. Although CF is a classic monogenic disease, the
importance of non-CFTR gene modifiers and proteins that regulate
ion flux, inflammatory pathways, and airway remodeling has been
appreciated as influencing clinical course. For example, the
magnitude of transepithelial sodium reabsorption in CF airways,
which helps control periciliary fluid depth and composition, is strongly
influenced by CFTR and represents a molecular target for
intervention.
■ CFTR MODULATORS
Potentiation of Mutant CFTR Gating A major effort directed toward
high-throughput analysis of large compound libraries (including
millions of individual agents) has identified effective new approaches
to CF therapy. The first approved compound in this class, ivacaftor,
robustly potentiates CFTR channel opening and stimulates ion
transport. Ivacaftor overcomes the G551D CFTR gating defect, and
individuals carrying this mutation exhibit pronounced improvement in
lung function, weight gain, and other clinical benefit following oral
therapy. Sweat chloride values are significantly reduced by the drug.
Prior to ivacaftor, no clinical intervention of any sort had been shown
to normalize the CF sweat phenotype. In addition to G551D,
ivacaftor has been approved in the United States for 96 other CFTR
variants. Multiyear administration studies indicate durable respiratory
improvement. Ivacaftor has been viewed as the harbinger of a new

era for CF therapeutics directed at treating the most fundamental
causes of this disease.
Correction of the F508del Processing Abnormality Lumacaftor
and tezacaftor, two U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)–
approved “corrector” molecules that repair CFTR misfolding (as
distinct from CFTR gating “potentiators” such as ivacaftor), partially
overcome defective F508del CFTR biogenesis. The drugs promote
cell surface localization of F508del CFTR. Formulations of
lumacaftor or tezacaftor (together with ivacaftor to augment channel
opening) typically confer modest improvement in pulmonary function
among individuals homozygous for F508del (∼45% of the U.S. CF
population). Elexacaftor, a next-generation corrector that operates
through a different mechanism of action, is FDA-approved in
combination with tezacaftor and ivacaftor for patients with CF
encoding at least one F508del variant (irrespective of the other
CFTR mutations), as well as for a series of less common CFTR
defects. This triple combination therapy (TCT) may, therefore, benefit
>90% of individuals with the disease. Marked enhancement of forced
expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1), fewer respiratory exacerbations,
improved quality of life, and diminished sweat chloride have all been
demonstrated in patients following TCT, leading to designation as
“highly effective modulator treatments” (HEMTs). For example,
among patients carrying one F508del together with a CFTR minimal
function variant, FEV1 (% predicted) was improved by ∼14% over a
4- to 24-week treatment period. Monitoring liver function of patients
started on TCTs and attention to pharmacologic interactions,
including effects mediated by CYP3A, are required. (See Video 2912A,B).
Personalized Molecular Therapies The advent of CFTR
modulators with robust clinical impact has engendered new optimism
regarding care of patients with CF. Based on the large number of
disease-causing CFTR mutations, together with the ability to group
these into molecular categories (Fig. 291-2), CF has been deemed a
condition ideally suited for personalized (i.e., mechanistically
tailored) drug treatment. That being said, many CFTR variants

clearly exhibit multiple molecular abnormalities (across more than
one mechanistic subclass), and modulator compounds can therefore
provide benefit across numerous disease subcategories. CFTR drug
discovery—while highly successful—might, therefore, be viewed as
less “personalized” or “precise” than originally envisioned. Moreover,
clinical data indicate that a subset of individuals with F508del
respond poorly to TCTs. Understanding the multifactorial
determinants mediating favorable drug response and risk of toxicity
(e.g., genomic loci other than CFTR, epigenetic/environmental
features, complex CFTR alleles with numerous polymorphisms)
constitutes a major objective for future research in the field.
Other Challenges Involving CF Precision Therapy The high cost
of modulator compounds has often restricted third-party
reimbursement to include only the specific genotypes for which FDA
or other regulatory approval has been obtained. As a consequence,
modulator access to potentially efficacious agents among patients
with very rare CFTR defects, and off-label prescribing, are largely
precluded. Moreover, clinical trials intended to expand the drug label
can be difficult to arrange based on the small numbers of patients
carrying ultra-rare alleles. In vitro models rigorously shown to predict
clinical modulator response have proven useful in this setting (e.g.,
studies of primary airway or other well-validated epithelial
monolayers, organoid cultures) and are being advanced as a
potential means to expand regulatory approval for uncommon
variants.
Progress in CF drug discovery is emblematic of what might be
accomplished in other refractory inherited conditions using an
approach grounded in molecular mechanism and unbiased
compound library screening. Genetic manipulation (CFTR gene
transfer, certain types of genome editing, etc.) and airway progenitor
cell treatments comprise experimental strategies less dependent on
a specific (i.e., personalized) CFTR mutation. Such approaches will
require efficient, durable, and safe in vivo delivery, with particular
emphasis on CF lung disease.
■ THERAPEUTICS DIRECTED TOWARD CF SEQUELAE

Chronic Outpatient Management, Including Relationship to
Modulators Standard care for patients with CF is intensive, with
outpatient regimens that include exogenous pancreatic enzymes
taken with meals, nutritional supplementation, anti-inflammatory
medication, bronchodilators, and chronic or periodic administration of
oral or aerosolized antibiotics (e.g., as maintenance therapy for
patients with P. aeruginosa). Recombinant DNAse aerosols (degrade
DNA strands that contribute to mucus viscosity) and nebulized
hypertonic saline (serves to augment PCL depth, activate
mucociliary clearance, and mobilize inspissated airway secretions)
are administered routinely. Chest physiotherapy several times each
day is a standard means to promote clearance of airway mucus.
Among adults with CF, malabsorption, chronic inflammation, and
endocrine abnormalities can lead to poor bone mineralization,
requiring treatment with vitamin D, calcium, and other measures.
The time, complexity, and expense of home care are considerable
and take a significant toll on patients and their families.
Chronic sequelae of CF have received particular attention in the
era of highly effective modulator treatment, since patients with
established CF lung disease given TCT or other formulations
continue to exhibit respiratory infection and inflammation despite
clinical improvement. Moreover, impact of CFTR modulators has not
been well characterized for many extrapulmonary manifestations of
the disease. Improved treatments that address ongoing respiratory
infection/inflammation, nutritional deficits, hepatic and endocrine
abnormalities, mucostasis, or other features that persist despite
modulator treatment remain a priority. Opportunities to define better
these aspects of CF and simplify therapeutic regimens among
patients recently started on TCT are the focus of several multicenter
trials.
Pulmonary Exacerbation Severe CF respiratory exacerbation is
commonly managed by hospital admission for parenteral antibiotics
and frequent chest physiotherapy directed against (often multidrugresistant) bacterial pathogens. Aggressive intervention in this setting
can restore a large component of lung function, but ongoing and
cumulative loss of pulmonary reserve has traditionally reflected

natural history of the disease. Poor prognostic indicators such as
sputum culture containing Burkholderia cepacia complex, mucoid P.
aeruginosa, or atypical mycobacteria are rigorously monitored in the
CF patient population. An increasing incidence of methicillin-resistant
S. aureus has also been observed and may be associated with poor
outcomes. Typical inpatient antibiotic coverage includes combination
drug therapy with an aminoglycoside and β-lactam for at least 14
days. Maximal improvement in lung function is often achieved by 8–
10 days in that setting, although optimal duration of therapy is a
subject of continuing investigation. Many families elect parenteral
antibiotic treatment at home, but additional studies are needed to
evaluate specific drug combinations, duration of therapy, and home
versus inpatient management. Other CF respiratory sequelae that
may require hospitalization include hemoptysis and pneumothorax.
Hypersensitivity to Aspergillus (allergic bronchopulmonary
aspergillosis) occurs in ∼5% of individuals with the disease and
should be considered in the absence of favorable response to
aggressive inpatient treatment. Contributions of viral infection
(including SARS-CoV-2) during acute CF respiratory decline
represent an area of intense clinical interest.
Lung Transplantation For end-stage CF pulmonary failure,
transplantation is a viable therapeutic option with median survival >9
years among adults with the disease. Determining optimal timing for
surgery presents a substantial challenge in patients with severe
respiratory compromise, particularly since the rate of continued
functional decline, as well as individualized mortality risk from
transplantation, can be difficult to predict. FEV1 measurements
<30% predicted, together with an assortment of other clinical
parameters (hospitalization frequency, need for supplemental
oxygen, etc.), are employed as thresholds for transplant referral,
although patients with conditions such as significant pulmonary
hypertension may merit consultation at higher FEV1. Based on
clinical outcome and other features, eligible patients with CF and
their families sometimes do not pursue a surgical option. The
decision is best approached through early discussions with health

care providers specializing in both CF clinical management and
transplantation.
■ CF QUALITY IMPROVEMENT
As a direct result of advances in basic research, modulator and other
therapies are transforming CF from a disease that historically led to
death in early childhood to a condition with frequent survival well into
the fourth decade of life and beyond. Although initiating modulator
treatment in young children may extend longevity even further by
forestalling pulmonary damage, this prediction will require formal
evaluation. As modulatory therapies advance, carefully standardized
approaches to management will be essential. Well-defined protocols
for CF care have been widely established, including thresholds for
hospital admission, antibiotic regimens, nutritional guidelines,
periodicity of diagnostic tests, and other clinical parameters. These
recommendations are accepted throughout specialized CF care
centers and other accredited programs. Such measures have led to
markedly improved pulmonary function, weight gain, body mass
index, and other clinical endpoints among patients with the disease.
The same approach is expected to optimize benefit attributable to
CFTR modulation. Standardized protocols for CF therapy can be
accessed at www.cff.org/treatments/cfcareguidelines/ or through a
number of excellent reviews.
■ GLOBAL CONSIDERATIONS
Newborn screening for CF is universal throughout the United States
and Canadian provinces, Australia, New Zealand, and much of
Europe, and facilitates early intervention. Nutritional and other
therapies at a young age are expected to promote quality of life and
increase longevity. Global implementation of quality improvement
measures and access to novel therapeutics have become increasing
imperatives. For example, median survival among individuals with
CF is <30 years in much of Latin America (compared to >45 years in
the United States). The less favorable prognosis is attributable in
part to lack of widespread diagnostic capabilities (i.e., newborn
screening, sweat testing, and genetic analysis tailored to ethnic

background), together with insufficient access to leading-edge,
interdisciplinary treatment. Efforts to apply state-of-the-art
management to underdiagnosed and underserved CF patient
populations will help improve outcomes and mitigate CF health
disparities in the future.

292 Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease Edwin K. Silverman, James D. Crapo, Barry J. Make
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is defined as a
disease state characterized by persistent respiratory symptoms and
airflow obstruction (https://goldcopd.org/2021-gold-reports/). COPD
includes emphysema, an anatomically defined condition
characterized by destruction of the lung alveoli with air space
enlargement; chronic bronchitis, a clinically defined condition with
chronic cough and phlegm; and/or small airway disease, a condition
in which small bronchioles are narrowed and reduced in number.
The classic definition of COPD requires the presence of chronic
airflow obstruction, determined by spirometry, that usually occurs in
the setting of noxious environmental exposures—most commonly
products of combustion, cigarette smoking in the United States, and
biomass fuels in some other countries. Host factors such as
abnormal lung development and genetics can lead to COPD.
Emphysema, chronic bronchitis, and small airway disease are
present in varying degrees in different COPD patients. Patients with
a history of cigarette smoking without chronic airflow obstruction may
have chronic bronchitis, emphysema, and dyspnea. Although these
patients are not included within the classic definition of COPD, they
may have similar disease processes. Respiratory symptoms and
other features of COPD can occur in subjects who do not meet a
definition of COPD based only on airflow obstruction determined by
spirometric population thresholds of normality. Investigators in the
COPDGene study recently proposed a multidimensional approach to
COPD diagnosis, which is based on domains of environmental
exposures, respiratory symptoms, imaging abnormalities, and
physiologic abnormalities.
COPD is the fourth leading cause of death and affects >10 million
persons in the United States. COPD is also a disease of increasing
public health importance around the world. Globally, there are an
estimated 250 million individuals with COPD.

PATHOGENESIS
Airflow obstruction, the physiologic marker of COPD, can result from
airway disease and/or emphysema. Small airways may become
narrowed by cells (hyperplasia and accumulation), mucus, and
fibrosis, and extensive small airway destruction has been
demonstrated to be a hallmark of COPD. Although the precise
biological mechanisms leading to COPD have not been determined,
a number of key cell types, molecules, and pathways have been
identified from cell-based and animal model studies. The
pathogenesis of emphysema (shown in Fig. 292-1) is more clearly
defined than the pathogenesis of small airway disease. Pulmonary
vascular destruction occurs in concert with small airway disease and
emphysema.

FIGURE 292-1 Pathogenesis of emphysema. Upon long-term exposure to
cigarette smoke in genetically susceptible individuals, lung epithelial cells and T
and B lymphocytes recruit inflammatory cells to the lung. Biological pathways of
protease-antiprotease imbalance, oxidant/antioxidant imbalance, apoptosis, and

lung repair lead to extracellular matrix destruction, cell death, chronic
inflammation, and ineffective repair. Although most of these biological pathways
influence multiple pathobiological results, only a single relationship between
pathways and results is shown. A subset of key molecules related to these
biological pathways is listed.

The current dominant paradigm for the pathogenesis of
emphysema comprises a series of four interrelated events: (1)
Chronic exposure to cigarette smoke in genetically susceptible
individuals triggers inflammatory and immune cell recruitment within
large and small airways and in the terminal air spaces of the lung. (2)
Inflammatory cells release proteinases that damage the extracellular
matrix supporting airways, vasculature, and gas exchange surfaces
of the lung. (3) Structural cell death occurs through oxidant-induced
damage, cellular senescence, and proteolytic loss of cellular-matrix
attachments leading to extensive loss of smaller airways, vascular
pruning, and alveolar destruction. (4) Disordered repair of elastin and
other extracellular matrix components contributes to air space
enlargement and emphysema.
■ INFLAMMATION AND EXTRACELLULAR MATRIX
PROTEOLYSIS
Elastin, the principal component of elastic fibers, is a highly stable
component of the extracellular matrix that is critical to the integrity of
the lung. The elastase:antielastase hypothesis, proposed in the mid1960s, postulated that the balance of elastin-degrading enzymes
and their inhibitors determines the susceptibility of the lung to
destruction, resulting in air space enlargement. This hypothesis was
based on the clinical observation that patients with genetic deficiency
in α1 antitrypsin (α1AT), the inhibitor of the serine proteinase
neutrophil elastase, were at increased risk of emphysema, and that
instillation of elastases, including neutrophil elastase, into
experimental animals results in emphysema. The
elastase:antielastase hypothesis remains a prevailing mechanism for
the development of emphysema. However, a complex network of
immune and inflammatory cells and additional biological
mechanisms that contribute to emphysema have subsequently been
identified. Upon exposure to oxidants from cigarette smoke, lung

macrophages and epithelial cells become activated, producing
proteinases and chemokines that attract other inflammatory and
immune cells. Oxidative stress is a key component of COPD
pathobiology; the transcription factor NRF2, a major regulator of
oxidant-antioxidant balance, and SOD3, a potent antioxidant, have
been implicated in emphysema pathogenesis by animal models.
Mitochondrial dysfunction in COPD may worsen oxidative stress.
One mechanism of macrophage activation occurs via oxidantinduced inactivation of histone deacetylase-2 (HDAC2), shifting the
balance toward acetylated or open chromatin, exposing nuclear
factor-κB sites, and resulting in transcription of matrix
metalloproteinases and proinflammatory cytokines such as
interleukin 8 (IL-8) and tumor necrosis factor α (TNF-α); this leads to
neutrophil recruitment. CD8+ T cells are also recruited in response
to cigarette smoke and release interferon-inducible protein-10 (IP-10,
CXCL-7), which in turn leads to macrophage production of
macrophage elastase (matrix metalloproteinase-12 [MMP-12]).
Matrix metalloproteinases and serine proteinases, most notably
neutrophil elastase, work together by degrading the inhibitor of the
other, leading to lung destruction. Proteolytic cleavage products of
elastin serve as a macrophage chemokine, and proline-glycineproline (generated by proteolytic cleavage of collagen) is a neutrophil
chemokine—fueling this destructive positive feedback loop. Elastin
degradation and disordered repair are thought to be primary
mechanisms in the development of emphysema.
There is some evidence that autoimmune mechanisms may
promote the progression of disease. Increased B cells and lymphoid
follicles are present around the airways of COPD patients,
particularly those with advanced disease. Antibodies have been
found against elastin fragments as well; IgG autoantibodies with
avidity for pulmonary epithelium and the potential to mediate
cytotoxicity have been detected.
Concomitant cigarette smoke–induced loss of cilia in the airway
epithelium and impaired macrophage phagocytosis predispose to
bacterial infection with neutrophilia. In end-stage lung disease, long
after smoking cessation, there remains an exuberant inflammatory
response, suggesting that cigarette smoke–induced inflammation

both initiates the disease and, in susceptible individuals, establishes
a chronic process that can continue disease progression even after
smoking cessation.
Cell Death Cigarette smoke oxidant-mediated structural cell death
occurs via a variety of mechanisms including excessive ceramide
production and Rtp801 inhibition of mammalian target of rapamycin
(mTOR), leading to cell death as well as inflammation and
proteolysis. Involvement of mTOR and other cellular senescence
markers has led to the concept that emphysema resembles
premature aging of the lung. Heterozygous gene-targeting of one of
the leading genetic determinants of COPD identified by genomewide association studies (GWAS), hedgehog interacting protein
(HHIP), in a murine model leads to aging-related emphysema.
Ineffective Repair The ability of the adult lung to replace lost
smaller airways and microvasculature and to repair damaged alveoli
appears limited. Uptake of apoptotic cells by macrophages normally
results in production of growth factors and dampens inflammation,
promoting lung repair. Cigarette smoke impairs macrophage uptake
of apoptotic cells, limiting repair. It is unlikely that the intricate and
dynamic process of septation that is responsible for alveologenesis
during lung development can be reinitiated in the adult human lung.

PATHOLOGY
Cigarette smoke exposure may affect the large airways, small
airways (≤2 mm diameter), and alveoli. Changes in large airways
cause cough and sputum production, while changes in small airways
and alveoli are responsible for physiologic alterations. Airway
inflammation, destruction, and the development of emphysema are
present in most persons with COPD; however, they appear to be
relatively independent processes, and their relative contributions to
obstruction vary from one person to another. The early stages of
COPD, based on the severity of airflow obstruction (Table 292-1),
appear to be primarily associated with medium and small airway
disease with the majority of Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive

Lung Disease (GOLD) spirometric airflow obstruction stage 1 and
stage 2 subjects demonstrating little or no emphysema. The early
development of chronic airflow obstruction is driven by small airway
disease. Advanced stages of COPD (GOLD stages 3 and 4) are
typically characterized by extensive emphysema, although there are
a small number of subjects with very severe (GOLD stage 4)
obstruction with virtually no emphysema. The subjects at greatest
risk of progression in COPD are those with both aggressive airway
disease and emphysema. Thus, finding emphysema (by chest
computed tomography [CT]) either early or late in the disease
process suggests enhanced risk for disease progression.
TABLE 292-1 GOLD Criteria for Severity of Airflow Obstruction
in COPD

■ LARGE AIRWAYS
Cigarette smoking often results in mucus gland enlargement and
goblet cell hyperplasia, leading to cough and mucus production that
define chronic bronchitis, but these abnormalities are not directly
related to airflow obstruction. In response to cigarette smoking,
goblet cells increase not only in number but also in extent through
the bronchial tree. Bronchi also undergo squamous metaplasia,
predisposing to carcinogenesis and disrupting mucociliary clearance.
Although not as prominent as in asthma, patients may have smooth-

muscle hypertrophy and bronchial hyperreactivity leading to airflow
obstruction. Neutrophil influx has been associated with purulent
sputum during respiratory tract infections. Independent of its
proteolytic activity, neutrophil elastase is among the most potent
secretagogues identified.
■ SMALL AIRWAYS
The major site of increased resistance in most individuals with
COPD is in airways ≤2 mm diameter. Characteristic cellular changes
include goblet cell metaplasia, with these mucus-secreting cells
replacing surfactant-secreting Club cells. Smooth-muscle
hypertrophy may also be present. Luminal narrowing can occur by
fibrosis, excess mucus, edema, and cellular infiltration. Reduced
surfactant may increase surface tension at the air-tissue interface,
predisposing to airway narrowing or collapse. Respiratory
bronchiolitis with mononuclear inflammatory cells collecting in distal
airway tissues may cause proteolytic destruction of elastic fibers in
the respiratory bronchioles and alveolar ducts where the fibers are
concentrated as rings around alveolar entrances. Narrowing and
drop-out of small airways precede the onset of emphysematous
destruction. Advanced COPD has been shown to be associated with
a loss of many of the smaller airways and a similar significant loss of
the lung microvasculature.
■ LUNG PARENCHYMA
Emphysema is characterized by destruction of gas-exchanging air
spaces, i.e., the respiratory bronchioles, alveolar ducts, and alveoli.
Large numbers of macrophages accumulate in respiratory
bronchioles of essentially all smokers. Neutrophils, B lymphocytes,
and T lymphocytes, particularly CD8+ cells, are also increased in the
alveolar space of smokers. Alveolar walls become perforated and
later obliterated with coalescence of the delicate alveolar structure
into large emphysematous air spaces.
Emphysema is classified into distinct pathologic types, which
include centrilobular, panlobular, and paraseptal (Fig 292-2).
Centrilobular emphysema, the type most frequently associated with

cigarette smoking, is characterized by enlarged air spaces found
(initially) in association with respiratory bronchioles. Centrilobular
emphysema is usually most prominent in the upper lobes and
superior segments of lower lobes and is often quite focal. Panlobular
emphysema refers to abnormally large air spaces evenly distributed
within and across acinar units. Panlobular emphysema is commonly
observed in patients with α1AT deficiency, which has a predilection
for the lower lobes. Paraseptal emphysema occurs in 10–15% of
cases and is distributed along the pleural margins with relative
sparing of the lung core or central regions. It is commonly associated
with significant airway inflammation and with centrilobular
emphysema.

FIGURE 292-2 CT patterns of emphysema. A. Centrilobular emphysema with
severe upper lobe involvement in a 68-year-old man with a 70-pack-year smoking
history but forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) 81% predicted (GOLD
spirometry grade 1). B. Panlobular emphysema with diffuse loss of lung
parenchymal detail predominantly in the lower lobes in a 64-year-old man with
severe α1 antitrypsin (α1AT) deficiency. C. Paraseptal emphysema with marked
airway inflammation in a 52-year-old woman with a 37-pack-year smoking history
and FEV1 40% predicted.

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Persistent reduction in forced expiratory flow rates is the classic
definition of COPD. Hyperinflation with increases in the residual
volume and the residual volume/total lung capacity ratio, nonuniform

distribution of ventilation, and ventilation-perfusion mismatching also
occur.
■ AIRFLOW OBSTRUCTION
Airflow obstruction, also known as airflow limitation, is typically
determined for clinical purposes by spirometry, which involves
maximal forced expiratory maneuvers after the subject has inhaled
to total lung capacity. Key parameters obtained from spirometry
include the volume of air exhaled within the first second of the forced
expiratory maneuver (FEV1) and the total volume of air exhaled
during the entire spirometric maneuver (forced vital capacity [FVC]).
Patients with airflow obstruction related to COPD have a chronically
reduced ratio of FEV1/FVC. In contrast to asthma, the reduced FEV1
in COPD seldom shows large improvements to inhaled
bronchodilators, although improvements up to 15% are common.
■ HYPERINFLATION
Lung volumes are also routinely assessed in pulmonary function
testing. In COPD, there is often “air trapping” (increased residual
volume and increased ratio of residual volume to total lung capacity)
and progressive hyperinflation (increased total lung capacity) in more
advanced disease. Hyperinflation of the thorax during tidal breathing
preserves maximum expiratory airflow, because as lung volume
increases, elastic recoil pressure increases, and airways enlarge so
that airway resistance decreases.
Despite compensating for airway obstruction, hyperinflation can
push the diaphragm into a flattened position with a number of
adverse effects. First, by decreasing the zone of apposition between
the diaphragm and the abdominal wall, positive abdominal pressure
during inspiration is not applied as effectively to the chest wall,
hindering rib cage movement and impairing inspiration. Second,
because the muscle fibers of the flattened diaphragm are shorter
than those of a more normally curved diaphragm, they are less
capable of generating inspiratory pressures than normal. Third, the
flattened diaphragm must generate greater tension to develop the
transpulmonary pressure required to produce tidal breathing. Fourth,

the thoracic cage is distended beyond its normal resting volume, and
during tidal breathing, the inspiratory muscles must do work to
overcome the resistance of the thoracic cage to further inflation
instead of gaining the normal assistance from the chest wall recoiling
outward toward its resting volume.
■ GAS EXCHANGE
Although there is considerable variability in the relationships
between the FEV1 and other physiologic abnormalities in COPD,
certain generalizations may be made. The partial pressure of oxygen
in arterial blood PaO2 usually remains near normal until the FEV1 is
decreased to below 50% of predicted, and even much lower FEV1
values can be associated with a normal PaO2, at least at rest. An
elevation of arterial level of carbon dioxide (PaCO2) is not expected
until the FEV1 is <25% of predicted and even then may not occur.
Pulmonary arterial hypertension severe enough to cause cor
pulmonale and right ventricular failure due to COPD typically occurs
in individuals who have marked decreases in FEV1 (<25% of
predicted) and chronic hypoxemia (PaO2 <55 mmHg); however,
some patients develop significant pulmonary arterial hypertension
independent of COPD severity (Chap. 283).
Nonuniform ventilation and ventilation-perfusion mismatching are
characteristic of COPD, reflecting the heterogeneous nature of the
disease process within the airways and lung parenchyma.
Physiologic studies are consistent with multiple parenchymal
compartments having different rates of ventilation due to regional
differences in compliance and airway resistance. Ventilationperfusion mismatching accounts for essentially all of the reduction in
PaO2 that occurs in COPD; shunting is minimal. This finding explains
the effectiveness of modest elevations of inspired oxygen in treating
hypoxemia due to COPD and therefore the need to consider
problems other than COPD when hypoxemia is difficult to correct
with modest levels of supplemental oxygen.

RISK FACTORS

■ CIGARETTE SMOKING
By 1964, the Advisory Committee to the Surgeon General of the
United States had concluded that cigarette smoking was a major risk
factor for mortality from chronic bronchitis and emphysema.
Subsequent longitudinal studies have shown accelerated decline in
FEV1 in a dose-response relationship to the intensity of cigarette
smoking, which is typically expressed as pack-years (average
number of packs of cigarettes smoked per day multiplied by the total
number of years of smoking). This dose-response relationship
between reduced pulmonary function and cigarette smoking intensity
accounts, at least in part, for the higher prevalence rates of COPD
with increasing age. The historically higher rate of smoking among
males is the likely explanation for the higher prevalence of COPD
among males; however, the prevalence of COPD among females is
increasing as the gender gap in smoking rates has diminished in the
past 50 years.
Although the causal relationship between cigarette smoking and
the development of COPD has been absolutely proved, there is
considerable individual variability in the response to smoking. Packyears of cigarette smoking is the most highly significant predictor of
FEV1 (Fig. 292-3), but only 15% of the variability in FEV1 is
explained by pack-years. This finding suggests that additional
environmental and/or genetic factors contribute to the impact of
smoking on the development of chronic airflow obstruction.
Nonetheless, many patients with a history of cigarette smoking with
normal spirometry have evidence for worse health-related quality of
life, reduced exercise capacity, and emphysema and/or airway
disease on chest CT evaluation; thus, they have not escaped the
harmful effects of cigarette smoking. While they do not meet the
classic definition of COPD based on population normals for FEV1
and FEV1/FVC, studies have shown that these subjects overall have
a shift toward lower FEV1 values, which is consistent with
obstruction on an individual level.

FIGURE 292-3 Distributions of forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) values
in a general population sample, stratified by pack-years of smoking. Means,
medians, and ±1 standard deviation of percent predicted FEV1 are shown for each
smoking group. Although a dose-response relationship between smoking intensity
and FEV1 was found, marked variability in pulmonary function was observed
among subjects with similar smoking histories. S.D., standard deviation.
(Reproduced with permission from B Burrows: Quantitative relationships between
cigarette smoking and ventilatory function. Am Rev Respir Dis 115:195, 1997.)

Although cigar and pipe smoking may also be associated with the
development of COPD, the evidence supporting such associations is
less compelling, likely related to the lower dose of inhaled tobacco

by-products during cigar and pipe smoking. The impact of electronic
cigarettes and vaping on the development and progression of COPD
has not yet been determined.
■ AIRWAY RESPONSIVENESS AND COPD
A tendency for increased bronchoconstriction in response to a
variety of exogenous stimuli, including methacholine and histamine,
is one of the defining features of asthma (Chap. 287). However,
many patients with COPD also share this feature of airway
hyperresponsiveness. In older subjects, there is considerable
overlap between persons with a history of chronic asthma and
smokers with COPD in terms of airway responsiveness, airflow
obstruction, and pulmonary symptoms. The origin of asthma is
viewed in many patients as an allergic disease while COPD is
thought to primarily result from smoking-related inflammation and
damage; however, they likely share common environmental and
genetic factors and the chronic form in older subjects can present
similarly. This is particularly relevant for childhood asthmatic subjects
who become chronic smokers.
Longitudinal studies that compared airway responsiveness to
subsequent decline in pulmonary function have demonstrated that
increased airway responsiveness is clearly a significant predictor of
subsequent decline in pulmonary function. A study from the
Childhood Asthma Management Program identified four lung
function trajectories in children with persistent asthma. Asthmatics
with reduced lung function early in life were more likely to meet
spirometric criteria for COPD in early adulthood. Both asthma and
airway hyperresponsiveness are risk factors for COPD.
■ RESPIRATORY INFECTIONS
The impact of adult respiratory infections on decline in pulmonary
function is controversial, but significant long-term reductions in
pulmonary function are not typically seen following an individual
episode of acute bronchitis or pneumonia. However, respiratory
infections are important causes of COPD exacerbations, and recent
results from the COPDGene and ECLIPSE studies suggest that

COPD exacerbations are associated with increased loss of lung
function longitudinally, particularly among those individuals with
better baseline lung function levels. The impact of the effects of
childhood respiratory illnesses on the subsequent development of
COPD has been difficult to assess due to a lack of adequate
longitudinal data, but recent studies have suggested that childhood
pneumonia may lead to increased risk for COPD later in life.
■ OCCUPATIONAL EXPOSURES
Increased respiratory symptoms and airflow obstruction have been
suggested to result from exposure to dust and fumes. Several
specific occupational exposures, including coal mining, gold mining,
and cotton textile dust, have been implicated as risk factors for
chronic airflow obstruction. Although nonsmokers in these
occupations can develop some reductions in FEV1, the importance
of dust exposure as a risk factor for COPD, independent of cigarette
smoking, is not certain for most of these exposures. However,
among coal miners, coal mine dust exposure was a significant risk
factor for emphysema in both smokers and nonsmokers. In most
cases, the magnitude of these occupational exposures on COPD risk
is likely substantially less important than the effect of cigarette
smoking.
■ AMBIENT AIR POLLUTION
Some investigators have reported increased respiratory symptoms in
those living in urban compared to rural areas, which may relate to
increased pollution in the urban settings. However, the relationship of
air pollution to chronic airflow obstruction remains unproved.
Prolonged exposure to smoke produced by biomass combustion—a
common mode of cooking in some countries—also appears to be a
significant risk factor for COPD, particularly among women.
■ PASSIVE, OR SECOND-HAND, SMOKING EXPOSURE
Exposure of children to maternal smoking results in significantly
reduced lung growth. In utero, tobacco smoke exposure also
contributes to significant reductions in postnatal pulmonary function.

Although passive smoke exposure has been associated with
reductions in pulmonary function, the importance of this risk factor in
the development of the severe pulmonary function reductions often
observed in COPD remains uncertain.
■ GENETIC CONSIDERATIONS
Although cigarette smoking is the major environmental risk
factor for the development of COPD, the development of airflow
obstruction in smokers is highly variable. Severe α1AT deficiency is a
proven genetic risk factor for COPD; there is increasing evidence
that other genetic determinants also exist.
α1 Antitrypsin Deficiency Many variants of the protease inhibitor
(PI or SERPINA1) locus that encodes α1AT have been described.
The common M allele is associated with normal α1AT levels. The S
allele, associated with slightly reduced α1AT levels, and the Z allele,
associated with markedly reduced α1AT levels, also occur with
frequencies of >1% in most white populations. Rare individuals
inherit null alleles, which lead to the absence of any α1AT production
through a heterogeneous collection of mutations. Individuals with two
Z alleles or one Z and one null allele are referred to as PiZ, which is
the most common form of severe α1AT deficiency.
Although only ∼1% of COPD patients are found to have severe
α1AT deficiency as a contributing cause of COPD, these patients
demonstrate that genetic factors can have a profound influence on
the susceptibility for developing COPD. PiZ individuals often develop
early-onset COPD, but the ascertainment bias in the published
series of PiZ individuals—which have usually included many PiZ
subjects who were tested for α1AT deficiency because they had
COPD—means that the fraction of PiZ individuals who will develop
COPD and the age-of-onset distribution for the development of

COPD in PiZ subjects remain unknown. Approximately 1 in 3000
individuals in the United States inherits severe α1AT deficiency, but
only a small minority of these individuals has been identified. The
clinical laboratory test used most frequently to screen for α1AT
deficiency is measurement of the immunologic level of α1AT in
serum (see “Laboratory Findings”).
A significant percentage of the variability in pulmonary function
among PiZ individuals is explained by cigarette smoking; cigarette
smokers with severe α1AT deficiency are more likely to develop
COPD at early ages. However, the development of COPD in PiZ
subjects, even among current or ex-smokers, is not absolute. Among
PiZ nonsmokers, impressive variability has been noted in the
development of airflow obstruction. Asthma and male gender also
appear to increase the risk of COPD in PiZ subjects. Other genetic
and/or environmental factors likely contribute to this variability.
Specific treatment in the form of α1AT augmentation therapy is
available for severe α1AT deficiency as a weekly IV infusion (see
“Treatment,” below).
The risk of lung disease in heterozygous PiMZ individuals, who
have intermediate serum levels of α1AT (∼60% of PiMM levels), has
been controversial. Several recent studies have demonstrated that
PiMZ subjects who smoke are likely at increased risk for the
development of COPD. However, α1AT augmentation therapy is not
recommended for use in PiMZ subjects.
Other Genetic Risk Factors Studies of pulmonary function
measurements performed in general population samples have
indicated that genetic factors other than PI type influence variation in
pulmonary function. Familial aggregation of airflow obstruction within
families of COPD patients has also been demonstrated.
GWAS have identified >80 regions of the genome that contain
COPD susceptibility loci, including a region near the HHIP gene on
chromosome 4, a cluster of genes on chromosome 15 (including
components of the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor and another gene,
IREB2, related to mitochondrial iron regulation), and a region within

a gene of unknown function (FAM13A). As with most other complex
diseases, the risk associated with individual GWAS loci is modest,
but these genetic determinants may identify important biological
pathways related to COPD. Gene-targeted murine models for HHIP,
FAM13A, and IREB2 exposed to chronic cigarette smoke had altered
emphysema susceptibility, suggesting that those genes are likely to
be involved in COPD pathogenesis.

NATURAL HISTORY
The effects of cigarette smoking on pulmonary function appear to
depend on the intensity of smoking exposure, the timing of smoking
exposure during growth and development, and the baseline lung
function of the individual; other environmental factors may have
similar effects. Most individuals follow a steady trajectory of
increasing pulmonary function with growth during childhood and
adolescence, followed by a plateau in early adulthood, and then
gradual decline with aging. Individuals appear to track in their
quantile of pulmonary function based on environmental and genetic
factors that put them on different tracks. The risk of eventual
mortality from COPD is closely associated with reduced levels of
FEV1. A graphic depiction of the natural history of COPD is shown
as a function of the influences on tracking curves of FEV1 in Fig.
292-4. Death or disability from COPD can result from a normal rate
of decline after a reduced growth phase (curve C), an early initiation
of pulmonary function decline after normal growth (curve B), or an
accelerated decline after normal growth (curve D). Although
accelerated rates of lung function decline have classically been
associated with COPD, recent analyses of several population-based
cohorts demonstrated that many subjects meeting the spirometric
criteria for COPD had reduced growth but normal rates of lung
function decline. The rate of decline in pulmonary function can be
modified by changing environmental exposures (i.e., quitting
smoking), with smoking cessation at an earlier age providing a more
beneficial effect than smoking cessation after marked reductions in
pulmonary function have already developed. The absolute annual
loss in FEV1 tends to be highest in mild COPD and lowest in very

severe COPD. Multiple genetic factors influence the level of
pulmonary function achieved during growth.

FIGURE 292-4 Hypothetical tracking curves of forced expiratory volume in 1
s (FEV1) for individuals throughout their life spans. The normal pattern of
growth and decline with age is shown by curve A. Significantly reduced FEV1
(<65% of predicted value at age 20) can develop from a normal rate of decline
after a reduced pulmonary function growth phase (curve C), early initiation of
pulmonary function decline after normal growth (curve B), or accelerated decline
after normal growth (curve D). (From B Rijcken: Doctoral dissertation, p 133,
University of Groningen, 1991; with permission.)

In chronic smokers, substantial chest CT changes (emphysema
and airway wall thickening) have been identified in subjects with
normal physiology (normal FEV1 and FEV1/FVC). COPD in these
subjects commonly progresses in two primary patterns. Subjects
with an emphysema-predominant pattern show emphysema early
and classically progress through GOLD 1 to GOLD 2–4. Subjects
with an airway disease–predominant pattern typically show initial
evidence of airway inflammation and progress with little emphysema
early as FEV1 falls while retaining a normal FEV1/FVC ratio. This is
termed preserved ratio–impaired spirometry (PRISm) physiology.

These subjects tend to develop emphysema late and can progress
directly to GOLD 3 and 4 with severe, end-stage COPD.

CLINICAL PRESENTATION
■ HISTORY
The three most common symptoms in COPD are cough, sputum
production, and exertional dyspnea. Many patients have such
symptoms for months or years before seeking medical attention.
Although the development of airflow obstruction is a gradual
process, many patients date the onset of their disease to an acute
illness or exacerbation. A careful history, however, usually reveals
the presence of respiratory symptoms prior to the acute
exacerbation. The development of exertional dyspnea, often
described as increased effort to breathe, heaviness, air hunger, or
gasping, can be insidious. It is best elicited by a careful history
focused on typical physical activities and how the patient’s ability to
perform them has changed. Activities involving significant arm work,
particularly at or above shoulder level, are particularly difficult for
many patients with COPD. Conversely, activities that allow the
patient to brace the arms and use accessory muscles of respiration
are better tolerated. Examples of such activities include pushing a
shopping cart or walking on a treadmill. As COPD advances, the
principal feature is worsening dyspnea on exertion with increasing
intrusion on the ability to perform vocational or avocational activities.
In the most advanced stages, patients are breathless doing basic
activities of daily living.
Accompanying worsening airflow obstruction is an increased
frequency of exacerbations (described below). Patients may also
develop resting hypoxemia and require institution of supplemental
oxygen.
■ PHYSICAL FINDINGS
In the early stages of COPD, patients usually have an entirely
normal physical examination. Current smokers may have signs of
active smoking, including an odor of smoke or nicotine staining of

fingernails. In patients with more severe disease, the physical
examination of the lungs is notable for a prolonged expiratory phase
and may include expiratory wheezing. In addition, signs of
hyperinflation include a barrel chest and enlarged lung volumes with
poor diaphragmatic excursion as assessed by percussion. Patients
with severe airflow obstruction may also exhibit use of accessory
muscles of respiration, sitting in the characteristic “tripod” position to
facilitate the actions of the sternocleidomastoid, scalene, and
intercostal muscles. Patients may develop cyanosis, visible in the
lips and nail beds.
Traditional teaching is that patients with predominant
emphysema, termed “pink puffers,” are thin, noncyanotic at rest, and
have prominent use of accessory muscles, and patients with chronic
bronchitis are more likely to be heavy and cyanotic (“blue bloaters”).
However, current evidence demonstrates that most patients have
elements of both chronic bronchitis and emphysema and that the
physical examination does not reliably differentiate the two entities.
Advanced disease may be accompanied by cachexia, with
significant weight loss and diffuse loss of subcutaneous adipose
tissue. This syndrome has been associated with both inadequate
oral intake and elevated levels of inflammatory cytokines (TNF-α).
Such wasting is an independent poor prognostic factor in COPD.
Some patients with advanced disease have paradoxical inward
movement of the rib cage with inspiration (Hoover’s sign), the result
of alteration of the vector of diaphragmatic contraction on the rib
cage due to chronic hyperinflation.
Signs of overt right heart failure, termed cor pulmonale, are
relatively infrequent since the advent of supplemental oxygen
therapy.
Clubbing of the digits is not a sign of COPD, and its presence
should alert the clinician to initiate an investigation for causes of
clubbing. In COPD patients, the development of lung cancer is the
most likely explanation for newly developed clubbing.
■ LABORATORY FINDINGS
The hallmark of COPD is airflow obstruction (discussed above).
Pulmonary function testing shows airflow obstruction with a reduction

in FEV1 and FEV1/FVC (Chap. 285). With worsening disease
severity, lung volumes may increase, resulting in an increase in total
lung capacity, functional residual capacity, and residual volume. In
patients with emphysema, the diffusing capacity may be reduced,
reflecting the lung parenchymal destruction characteristic of the
disease. The degree of airflow obstruction is an important prognostic
factor in COPD and is the basis for the GOLD spirometric severity
classification (Table 292-1). Although the degree of airflow
obstruction generally correlates with the presence and severity of
respiratory symptoms, exacerbations, emphysema, and hypoxemia,
the correlations are far from perfect. Thus, clinical features should be
carefully assessed in each individual patient with COPD to determine
the most appropriate therapies. It has been shown that a
multifactorial index (BODE), incorporating airflow obstruction,
exercise performance, dyspnea, and body mass index, is a better
predictor of mortality. Recently, GOLD added additional elements to
their COPD classification system incorporating respiratory symptoms
and exacerbation history; these metrics are used to guide COPD
treatment (see below).
Arterial blood gases and oximetry may demonstrate resting or
exertional hypoxemia. Arterial blood gases provide additional
information about alveolar ventilation and acid-base status by
measuring arterial PCO2 and pH. The change in pH with PCO2 is 0.08
units/10 mmHg acutely and 0.03 units/10 mmHg in the chronic state.
Knowledge of the arterial pH therefore allows the classification of
ventilatory failure, defined as PCO2 >45 mmHg, into acute or chronic
conditions with acute respiratory failure being associated with
acidemia. The arterial blood gas is an important component of the
evaluation of patients presenting with symptoms of an exacerbation.
An elevated hematocrit suggests the presence of chronic
hypoxemia, as does the presence of signs of right ventricular
hypertrophy.
Radiographic studies may assist in the classification of the type
of COPD. Increased lung volumes and flattening of the diaphragm
suggest hyperinflation but do not provide information about chronicity
of the changes. Obvious bullae, paucity of parenchymal markings, or
hyperlucency on chest x-ray suggests the presence of emphysema.

Chest CT scan is the current definitive test for establishing the
presence or absence of emphysema, the pattern of emphysema,
and the presence of significant disease involving medium and large
airways (Fig. 292-2). It also enables the discovery of coexisting
interstitial lung disease and bronchiectasis. Smokers with COPD are
at high risk for development of lung cancer, which can be identified
on a chest CT scan. In advanced COPD, CT scans can help
determine the possible value of surgical therapy (described below).
Recent guidelines have suggested testing for α1AT deficiency in
all subjects with COPD or asthma with chronic airflow obstruction.
Measurement of the serum α1AT level is a reasonable initial test. For
subjects with low α1AT levels, the definitive diagnosis of α1AT
deficiency requires PI type determination. This is typically performed
by isoelectric focusing of serum or plasma, which reflects the
genotype at the PI locus for the common alleles and many of the
rare PI alleles as well. Molecular genotyping can be performed for
the common PI alleles (M, S, and Z), and DNA sequencing can
detect other rare deficiency variants.
TREATMENT

Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease
STABLE PHASE COPD
The two main goals of therapy are to provide symptomatic relief
(reduce respiratory symptoms, improve exercise tolerance, and
improve health status) and reduce future risk (prevent disease
progression, prevent and treat exacerbations, and reduce mortality).
The institution of therapies should be based on symptom
assessment, benefits of therapy, potential risks, and costs. Figure
292-5 provides the currently suggested categories of COPD
patients based on respiratory symptoms and risk for exacerbations.
Response to therapy should be assessed, and decisions should be
made whether or not to continue or alter treatment.

FIGURE 292-5 Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) severity
assessment. COPD severity categories are based on respiratory symptoms
(based on the Modified Medical Research Council Dyspnea Scale [mMRC] or
COPD Assessment Test [CAT]) and annual frequency of COPD exacerbations.
The mMRC provides a single number for degree of breathlessness: 0—only with
strenuous activity; 1—hurrying on level ground or walking up a slight hill; 2—walk
slower than peers or stop walking at their own pace; 3—walking about 100 yards
or after a few minutes on level ground; 4—too breathless to leave the house or
when dressing. The CAT is an eight-item COPD health status measure with Likert
scale responses for questions about cough, phlegm, chest tightness, dyspnea on
one flight of stairs, limitation in home activities, confidence in leaving the home,
sleep, and energy. Range of total score is 0–40. Both mMRC and CAT are
available from Global Strategy for the Diagnosis, Management and Prevention of
COPD, Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) 2017.
(Reproduced with permission from Global Strategy for Diagnosis, Management
and Prevention of COPD 2017, ©.)

Three interventions—smoking cessation, oxygen therapy in
chronically hypoxemic patients, and lung volume reduction surgery
(LVRS) in selected patients with emphysema—have been
demonstrated to improve survival of patients with COPD. Recent
studies indicate that triple inhaled therapy (long-acting beta agonist
bronchodilator, long-acting muscarinic antagonist bronchodilator
and inhaled corticosteroid) reduces mortality in selected patients

with COPD. There is a suggestion that inhaled LAMA
bronchodilators may reduce mortality.
PHARMACOTHERAPY
Smoking Cessation (See also Chap. 454) It has been shown that
middle-aged smokers who were able to successfully stop smoking
experienced a significant improvement in the rate of decline in
pulmonary function, often returning to annual changes similar to that
of nonsmoking patients. In addition, smoking cessation improves
survival. Thus, all patients with COPD should be strongly urged to
quit smoking and educated about the benefits of quitting. An
emerging body of evidence demonstrates that combining
pharmacotherapy with traditional supportive approaches
considerably enhances the chances of successful smoking
cessation. There are three principal pharmacologic approaches to
the problem: nicotine replacement therapy available as gum,
transdermal patch, lozenge, inhaler, and nasal spray; bupropion;
and varenicline, a nicotinic acid receptor agonist/antagonist. Current
recommendations from the U.S. Surgeon General are that all adult,
nonpregnant smokers considering quitting be offered
pharmacotherapy, in the absence of any contraindication to
treatment. Smoking cessation counseling is also recommended and
free counseling is available through state Smoking QuitLines.
Bronchodilators In general, bronchodilators are the primary
treatment for almost all patients with COPD and are used for
symptomatic benefit and to reduce exacerbations. The inhaled route
is preferred for medication delivery, because side effects are less
than with systemic medication delivery. In symptomatic patients,
both regularly scheduled use of long-acting agents and as-needed
short-acting medications are indicated. Figure 292-6 provides
suggestions for prescribing inhaled medication therapy based on
grouping patients by severity of symptoms and risk of
exacerbations.

FIGURE 292-6 Medication therapy for stable chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD). Initial pharmacological therapy (Panel A) is based on both
COPD exacerbations and respiratory symptoms (assessed through the modified

Medical Research Council (mMRC) dyspnea questionnaire or the COPD
Assessment Test (CAT)). Follow-up pharmacological therapy (Panel B) is based
on response to treatment initiation and reassessment of symptoms and
exacerbations. Global Strategy for the Diagnosis, Management and Prevention of
COPD, Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD), 2021. *For
Panel B: consider if eos ≥300 or eos ≥100 AND ≥2 moderate exacerbations/1
hospitalization. **Consider de-escalation of ICS or switch if pneumonia,
inappropriate original indication or lack of response to ICS. CATTM, COPD
Assessment TestTM; Eos, blood eosinophil count in cells per microliter; FEV1,
forced expiratory volume in 1 second; ICS, inhaled corticosteroid; LABA, longacting beta agonist; LAMA, long-acting muscarinic antagonist; mMRC, modified
Medical Research Council dyspnea questionnaire. (Reproduced with permission
from the Global Strategy for Diagnosis, Management and Prevention of COPD
2021, ©.)

Muscarinic Antagonists Short-acting ipratropium bromide
improves symptoms with acute improvement in FEV1. Long-acting
muscarinic antagonists (LAMA, including aclidinium, glycopyrrolate,
glycopyrronium, revefenacin, tiotropium, and umeclidinium) improve
symptoms and reduce exacerbations. In a large randomized clinical
trial, there was a trend toward reduced mortality rate in tiotropiumtreated patients that approached statistical significance. Side effects
are minor; dry mouth is the most frequent side effect.
Beta Agonists Short-acting beta agonists ease symptoms with
acute improvements in lung function. Long-acting beta agonists
(LABAs) provide symptomatic benefit and reduce exacerbations,
though to a lesser extent than an LAMA. Currently available longacting inhaled beta agonists are arformoterol, formoterol,
indacaterol, olodaterol, salmeterol, and vilanterol. The main side
effects are tremor and tachycardia.
Combinations of Beta Agonist–Muscarinic Antagonist The
combination inhaled long-acting beta agonist and muscarinic
antagonist therapy has been demonstrated to provide improvement
in lung function that is greater than either agent alone and reduces
exacerbations.
Inhaled Corticosteroids The main role of ICS is to reduce
exacerbations. In population studies, patients with an eosinophil

count of <100 cells per microliter do not benefit, while benefit
increases as eosinophil counts rise above 100. ICS are never used
alone in COPD due to little symptomatic benefit but, rather, are
combined with a LABA or used with a LABA and LAMA. Their use
has been associated with increased rates of oropharyngeal
candidiasis and pneumonia and in some studies an increased rate
of loss of bone density and development of cataracts. A trial of ICS
should be considered in patients with frequent exacerbations,
defined as two or more per year or in patients hospitalized with one
exacerbation. In stable patients without exacerbations, ICS
withdrawal may be considered. Patients who continue to smoke
cigarettes do not benefit as greatly from ICS use. Although ICS
withdrawal does not lead to an increase in exacerbations, there may
be a small decline in lung function.
Oral Glucocorticoids The chronic use of oral glucocorticoids for
treatment of COPD is not recommended because of an unfavorable
benefit/risk ratio. The chronic use of oral glucocorticoids is
associated with significant side effects, including osteoporosis,
weight gain, cataracts, glucose intolerance, and increased risk of
infection. A study demonstrated that patients tapered off chronic
low-dose prednisone (∼10 mg/d) did not experience any adverse
effect on the frequency of exacerbations, health-related quality of
life, or lung function.
Theophylline Theophylline produces modest improvements in
airflow and vital capacity, but is not first-line therapy due to side
effects and drug interactions. Nausea is a common side effect;
tachycardia and tremor have also been reported. Monitoring of
blood theophylline levels is required to minimize toxicity.
PDE4 Inhibitors The selective phosphodiesterase 4 (PDE4)
inhibitor roflumilast has been demonstrated to reduce exacerbation
frequency in patients with severe COPD, chronic bronchitis, and a
prior history of exacerbations; its effects on airflow obstruction and
symptoms are modest, and side effects (including nausea, diarrhea,
and weight loss) are common.
Antibiotics There are strong data implicating bacterial infection as
a precipitant of a substantial portion of exacerbations. A randomized

clinical trial of azithromycin, chosen for both its anti-inflammatory
and antimicrobial properties, administered daily to subjects with a
history of exacerbation in the past 6 months demonstrated a
reduced exacerbation frequency and longer time to first
exacerbation in the macrolide-treated cohort (hazard ratio, 0.73).
Azithromycin was most effective in older patients and milder GOLD
stages; there was little benefit in current smokers.
Oxygen Supplemental O2 is the only pharmacologic therapy
demonstrated to unequivocally decrease mortality in patients with
COPD. For patients with resting hypoxemia (resting O2 saturation
≤88% in any patient or ≤89% with signs of pulmonary arterial
hypertension, right heart failure or erythrocytosis), the use of O2 has
been demonstrated to have a significant impact on mortality.
Patients meeting these criteria should be on continuous oxygen
supplementation because the mortality benefit is proportional to the
number of hours per day oxygen is used. Various delivery systems
are available, including portable systems that patients may carry to
allow mobility outside the home.
A recent study failed to demonstrate mortality benefits to COPD
patients with moderate hypoxemia at rest or with hypoxemia only
with activity.
α1AT Augmentation Therapy Specific treatment in the form of IV
α1AT augmentation therapy is available for individuals with severe
α1AT deficiency. Despite sterilization procedures for these bloodderived products and the absence of reported cases of viral
infection from therapy, some physicians recommend hepatitis B
vaccination prior to starting augmentation therapy. Although
biochemical efficacy of α1AT augmentation therapy has been
shown, the benefits of α1AT augmentation therapy are controversial.
A randomized study suggested a reduction in emphysema
progression in patients receiving α1AT augmentation therapy.
Eligibility for α1AT augmentation therapy requires a serum α1AT
level <11 μM (∼50 mg/dL). Typically, PiZ individuals will qualify,
although other rare types associated with severe deficiency (e.g.,
null-null) are also eligible. Because only a fraction of individuals with

severe α1AT deficiency will develop COPD, α1AT augmentation
therapy is not recommended for severely α1AT-deficient persons
with normal pulmonary function and a normal chest CT scan.
NONPHARMACOLOGIC THERAPIES
Patients with COPD should receive the influenza vaccine annually.
Pneumococcal vaccines and vaccination for Bordetella pertussis
are recommended.
Pulmonary Rehabilitation This refers to a comprehensive
treatment program that incorporates exercise, education, and
psychosocial and nutritional counseling. In COPD, pulmonary
rehabilitation has been demonstrated to improve health-related
quality of life, dyspnea, and exercise capacity. It has also been
shown to reduce rates of hospitalization over a 6- to 12-month
period.
Lung Volume Reduction Surgery In carefully selected patients
with emphysema, surgery to remove the most emphysematous
portions of lung improves exercise capacity, lung function, and
survival. The anatomic distribution of emphysema and
postrehabilitation exercise capacity are important prognostic
characteristics. Patients with upper lobe–predominant emphysema
and a low postrehabilitation exercise capacity are most likely to
benefit from LVRS.
Patients with an FEV1 <20% of predicted and either diffusely
distributed emphysema on CT scan or diffusing capacity of lung for
carbon monoxide (DLCO) <20% of predicted have increased
mortality after the procedure, and thus are not candidates for LVRS.
Methods of achieving lung volume reduction by using
bronchoscopic techniques have recently been approved by the U.S.
Food and Drug Administration; they appear to be beneficial in
selected emphysema patients.
Lung Transplantation (See also Chap. 298) COPD is currently
the second leading indication for lung transplantation. Current
recommendations are that candidates for lung transplantation
should have very severe airflow obstruction, severe disability

despite maximal medical therapy, and be free of significant
comorbid conditions such as liver, renal, or cardiac disease.
EXACERBATIONS OF COPD
Exacerbations are a prominent feature of the natural history of
COPD. Exacerbations are episodic acute worsening of respiratory
symptoms, including increased dyspnea, cough, wheezing, and/or
change in the amount and character of sputum. They may or may
not be accompanied by other signs of illness, including fever,
myalgias, and sore throat. The strongest single predictor of
exacerbations is a history of a previous exacerbation. The
frequency of exacerbations increases as airflow obstruction
worsens; patients with severe (FEV1 <50% predicted) or very
severe airflow obstruction (FEV1 <30% predicted) on average have
1–3 episodes per year. However, some individuals with very severe
airflow obstruction do not have frequent exacerbations. Other
factors, such as an elevated ratio of the diameter of the pulmonary
artery to aorta on chest CT and gastroesophageal reflux, are also
associated with increased risk of COPD exacerbations. Economic
analyses have shown that >70% of COPD-related health care
expenditures are due to emergency department visits and hospital
care for COPD exacerbations; this translates to over $10 billion
annually in the United States.
Precipitating Causes and Strategies to Reduce Frequency of
Exacerbations A variety of stimuli may result in the final common
pathway of airway inflammation and increased respiratory
symptoms that are characteristic of COPD exacerbations. Studies
suggest that acquiring a new strain of bacteria is associated with
increased near-term risk of exacerbation and that bacterial
infection/superinfection is involved in >50% of exacerbations. Viral
respiratory infections are present in approximately one-third of
COPD exacerbations. In a significant minority of instances (20–
35%), no specific precipitant can be identified.
Patient Assessment An attempt should be made to establish the
severity of the exacerbation as well as the severity of preexisting
COPD. The more severe either of these two components, the more

likely that the patient will require hospital admission. The history
should include quantification of the degree and change in dyspnea
by asking about breathlessness during activities of daily living and
typical activities for the patient. The patient should be asked about
fever; change in character of sputum; and associated symptoms
such as wheezing, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, myalgias, and chills.
Inquiring about the frequency and severity of prior exacerbations
can provide important information; the single greatest risk factor for
hospitalization with an exacerbation is a history of previous
hospitalization.
The physical examination should incorporate an assessment of
the degree of distress of the patient. Specific attention should be
focused on tachycardia, tachypnea, use of accessory muscles,
signs of perioral or peripheral cyanosis, the ability to speak in
complete sentences, and the patient’s mental status. The chest
examination should establish the presence or absence of focal
findings, degree of air movement, presence or absence of
wheezing, asymmetry in the chest examination (suggesting large
airway obstruction or pneumothorax mimicking an exacerbation),
and the presence or absence of paradoxical motion of the
abdominal wall.
Patients with severe underlying COPD, who are in moderate or
severe distress, or those with focal findings should have a chest xray or chest CT scan. Approximately 25% of x-rays in this clinical
situation will be abnormal, with the most frequent findings being
pneumonia and congestive heart failure. Patients with advanced
COPD, a history of hypercarbia, or mental status changes
(confusion, sleepiness) or those in significant distress should have
an arterial blood gas measurement. The presence of hypercarbia,
defined as a PCO2 >45 mmHg, has important implications for
treatment (discussed below). In contrast to its utility in the
management of exacerbations of asthma, measurement of
pulmonary function has not been demonstrated to be helpful in the
diagnosis or management of exacerbations of COPD. Pulmonary
embolus (PE) should also be considered, as the incidence of PE is
increased in COPD exacerbations.

The need for inpatient treatment of exacerbations is suggested
by the presence of respiratory acidosis and hypercarbia, new or
worsening hypoxemia, severe underlying disease, and those whose
living situation is not conducive to careful observation and the
delivery of prescribed treatment.
TREATMENT OF ACUTE EXACERBATIONS
Bronchodilators Typically, patients are treated with inhaled beta
agonists and muscarinic antagonists. These may be administered
separately or together, and the frequency of administration depends
on the severity of the exacerbation. Patients are often treated
initially with nebulized therapy, as such treatment is often easier to
administer in those in respiratory distress. It has been shown,
however, that conversion to metered-dose inhalers is effective when
accompanied by education and training of patients and staff. This
approach has significant economic benefits and also allows an
easier transition to outpatient care. The addition of methylxanthines
(theophylline) to this regimen can be considered, although
convincing proof of its efficacy is lacking. If methylxanthines are
added, serum levels should be monitored in an attempt to minimize
toxicity.
Antibiotics Patients with COPD are frequently colonized with
potential respiratory pathogens, and it is often difficult to identify
conclusively a specific species of bacteria responsible for a
particular clinical event. Bacteria frequently implicated in COPD
exacerbations include Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus
influenzae, Moraxella catarrhalis, and Chlamydia pneumoniae; viral
pathogens are also common etiologies of exacerbations. The
choice of antibiotic should be based on local patterns of antibiotic
susceptibility of the above bacterial pathogens as well as the
patient’s clinical condition. Patients with moderate or severe
exacerbations are usually treated with antibiotics, even in the
absence of data implicating a specific pathogen.
In patients admitted to the hospital, the use of systemic
glucocorticoids reduces the length of stay, hastens recovery, and
reduces the chance of subsequent exacerbation or relapse. One
study demonstrated that 2 weeks of glucocorticoid therapy

produced benefit indistinguishable from 8 weeks of therapy. Current
recommendations suggest 30–40 mg of oral prednisolone or its
equivalent typically for a period of 5–10 days in outpatients.
Hyperglycemia, particularly in patients with preexisting diagnosis of
diabetes, is the most frequently reported acute complication of
glucocorticoid treatment.
Oxygen Supplemental O2 should be supplied to maintain oxygen
saturation ≥90%. Studies have demonstrated that in patients with
both acute and chronic hypercarbia, the administration of
supplemental O2 does not reduce minute ventilation. It does, in
some patients, result in modest increases in arterial PCO2, chiefly by
altering ventilation-perfusion relationships within the lung. This
should not deter practitioners from providing the oxygen needed to
correct hypoxemia.
Mechanical Ventilatory Support The initiation of noninvasive
positive-pressure ventilation (NIPPV) in patients with respiratory
failure, defined as PaCO2 >45 mmHg, results in a significant
reduction in mortality rate, need for intubation, complications of
therapy, and hospital length of stay. Contraindications to NIPPV
include cardiovascular instability, impaired mental status, inability to
cooperate, copious secretions or the inability to clear secretions,
craniofacial abnormalities or trauma precluding effective fitting of
mask, extreme obesity, or significant burns.
Invasive (conventional) mechanical ventilation via an
endotracheal tube is indicated for patients with severe respiratory
distress despite initial therapy, life-threatening hypoxemia, severe
hypercarbia and/or acidosis, markedly impaired mental status,
respiratory arrest, hemodynamic instability, or other complications.
The goal of mechanical ventilation is to correct the aforementioned
conditions. Factors to consider during mechanical ventilatory
support include the need to provide sufficient expiratory time in
patients with severe airflow obstruction and the presence of autoPEEP (positive end-expiratory pressure), which can result in
patients having to generate significant respiratory effort to trigger a
breath during a demand mode of ventilation. The mortality rate of
patients requiring mechanical ventilatory support is 17–30% for that

particular hospitalization. For patients aged >65 admitted to the
intensive care unit for treatment, the mortality rate doubles over the
next year to 60%, regardless of whether mechanical ventilation was
required.
Following a hospitalization for COPD, about 20% of patients are
rehospitalized in the subsequent 30 days and 45% are hospitalized
in the next year. Mortality following hospital discharge is about 20%
in the following year.


293 Interstitial Lung Disease Gary M. Hunninghake, Ivan O. Rosas
Diffuse parenchymal lung diseases include a large number (>200) of
heterogeneous conditions that affect the lung parenchyma with
varying degrees of inflammation and fibrosis. While remodeling of
the interstitial space, the region between the epithelium and
endothelium, tends to be the dominant site of involvement for most
of the interstitial lung diseases (ILDs), it is important to recognize the
prominent role of the alveolar epithelium and endothelial cells
(including both airways and vessels) in the pathogenesis of these
ILDs.
Despite the diverse array of conditions, most patients ultimately
diagnosed with an ILD will come to medical attention with reports of
progressive exertional dyspnea or a persistent dry cough. However,
because some ILDs are part of multisystem disorders, some patients
will be identified based on nonrespiratory symptomatology (e.g., skin
thickening in the setting of systemic sclerosis, Chap. 359) or
physical examination findings (e.g., ulnar deviation of the fingers in
the setting of rheumatoid arthritis [RA], Chap. 358). Additionally,
ILDs can also be identified incidentally based on the results of
abnormal pulmonary function tests, chest x-rays (CXRs), computed
tomography (CT) studies of both the chest and abdomen (which can
both visualize, at least a portion, of the lung parenchyma), and
positron emission tomography (PET) scans. It is important to
remember that ILDs can be associated with high rates of morbidity
and mortality, and although prognosis depends on both disease
extent and specificity, this fact makes these important disorders to
recognize in a timely manner.
Owing to a variety of clinical presentations, as well as
overlapping imaging and histopathologic findings (Table 293-1), ILDs
can be difficult to diagnose. A generally accepted central tenet of ILD
diagnosis is that the combined weight of clinical data, laboratory
studies, pulmonary function testing, imaging findings, and

histopathology (if obtained) are jointly required to make a confident
diagnosis. No single piece of data confers a diagnosis alone. For
example, a lung biopsy demonstrating a usual interstitial pneumonia
(UIP) pattern is helpful in diagnosing a patient with idiopathic
pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) but can also be present in some connective
tissue diseases (CTDs) (e.g., RA-associated ILD, Chap. 358). In
light of this challenge, most ILD centers recommend a
multidisciplinary approach to the diagnosis (and in some cases the
management) of ILDs. An example of a multidisciplinary approach
might include a conference attended by pulmonologists,
rheumatologists, radiologists, and pathologists where all of the data
generated on a patient can be discussed and reviewed jointly by
those with unique sets of expertise in the care of patients with ILD.
TABLE 293-1 Common Interstitial Lung Disease (ILD) Findings

While there are numerous ways to categorize the ILDs, one
classic approach is to divide the ILDs into those of known and
unknown causes (Fig. 293-1). Although even this approach has
limitations (e.g., genetic studies demonstrate that a significant

portion of familial pulmonary fibrosis and IPF [classically described
as diseases of unknown cause] may be explained, in part, by genetic
factors), it is a useful place to start. Known causes of ILD include
occupational exposures (e.g., asbestosis), medications (e.g.,
nitrofurantoin), and those related to an underlying systemic disease
(e.g., cryptogenic organizing pneumonia [COP] in the setting of
polymyositis). Unknown causes of ILD include groups of rare
disorders often with classic presentations (e.g., a spontaneous
pneumothorax in a young female with diffuse cystic changes on a
chest CT might suggest lymphangioleiomyomatosis [LAM]) and the
most common group of ILDs, the idiopathic interstitial pneumonias
(IIPs). Granulomatous lung diseases straddle both known (e.g.,
hypersensitivity pneumonitis [HP] due to chronic bird exposure,
Chap. 288) and unknown (e.g., sarcoidosis, Chap. 367) causes and
are often separated due to their unique presentations, imaging
findings, and diagnostic evaluation. Equally important to knowledge
of disease classification is knowledge of disease prevalence.
Although there is variability within different demographic groups,
most studies demonstrate that IPF, sarcoidosis (Chap. 367), and
ILDs related to CTDs (Chap. 413) as a group are among the most
common forms of ILD.

DIAGNOSTIC APPROACH
The initial diagnostic approach to diffuse parenchymal lung disease
is often broader than a focus on ILD and should include an
evaluation for alternate causes including cardiovascular disease
(e.g., heart failure, Chap. 258), diffuse infections (e.g., pneumocystis
pneumonia, Chap. 220), and malignancy (e.g., bronchoalveolar cell
carcinoma, Chap. 315 in HPIM 19e). This chapter will focus on the
diagnostic evaluation that helps to distinguish among the various
forms of ILD.

■ HISTORY
Age Age at presentation has a strong influence on the pretest
probability that IPF, in particular, is present. For example, IPF occurs
most commonly in patients aged >60 and is quite rare among
patients aged <50. In fact, in patients aged >65 without strong
evidence for an alternate diagnosis, atypical chest CT findings are
still more likely to result in a histopathologic diagnosis of UIP (a
pathologic hallmark of IPF) than they are to result in an alternate IIP
diagnosis. Other common ILDs, such as sarcoidosis and CTDassociated ILD, and less common ILDs, such as LAM and
pulmonary Langerhans cell histiocytosis (PLCH), tend to present
between the ages of 20 and 40.
Sex Although less influential than age, sex has some influence on
likelihood of various ILDs. LAM (and the related disorder tuberous
sclerosis) (see Chap. 315 in HPIM 19e) is a disorder that is
frequently diagnosed in young women. Many CTD-associated ILDs
are more common among women, with the exception of RAassociated ILD, which is more common among men. IPF and
occupational/exposure-related ILDs (likely due to work-related
exposures that tend to differ between men and women) are more
common among men.
Duration of Symptoms Acute presentations (days to weeks) of ILD
are unusual and are commonly misdiagnosed as more common
diseases such as pneumonia, a chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD) exacerbation, or heart failure. ILDs that can present
acutely include eosinophilic pneumonia, acute interstitial pneumonia
(AIP), HP, and granulomatosis with polyangiitis (GPA). An acute
exacerbation of IPF as the initial presentation of this disease should
also be a consideration given its prevalence. ILDs most commonly
have a chronic indolent presentation (months to years) typified by
IPF. However, subacute presentations (weeks to months) can occur
in most of the ILDs, but in the right context could suggest
sarcoidosis, CTD-associated ILD, drug-induced ILD, or COP.

Respiratory Symptoms Progressive dyspnea, most frequently
noted with exertion, is the most common complaint in patients
presenting with an ILD. Despite this fact, both research studies of
general population samples and clinical experiences of
asymptomatic patient referrals with abnormal chest CT imaging
patterns have also demonstrated that some patients, even those with
more extensive disease, may not report dyspnea. Cough, particularly
a dry cough, is also common and can be the most prominent
symptom in patients with IPF. Cough is often reported in other ILDs,
particularly those that have prominent airway involvement including
sarcoidosis and HP. Cough with hemoptysis is rare and could
suggest an ILD associated with diffuse alveolar hemorrhage (DAH)
(e.g., Goodpasture’s syndrome), GPA, or LAM. Cough with
hemoptysis could also suggest a secondary pulmonary infection that
can be seen in patients with traction bronchiectasis and in those
receiving immunosuppressive therapy. Chest pain is rare in most of
the ILDs with the exception of sarcoidosis where chest discomfort is
not uncommon. Fatigue is common to all of the ILDs.
Past Medical History The most pertinent history includes a personal
history of a CTD or a history of symptoms commonly associated with
a CTD (e.g., Raynaud’s phenomena). It is also important to
remember that ILD associated with a CTD can be the initial
presenting symptom of the disease and can precede the
development of additional symptomatology by many years. A history
of malignancy is important because some malignancies can be
associated with dermatomyositis-associated COP and sarcoid-like
reactions. A history of asthma and allergic rhinitis might suggest a
diagnosis of eosinophilic GPA.
Medications Many medications have been associated with ILD, and
to complicate matters further, many medications commonly used to
treat inflammatory and granulomatous lung disease are also
associated with ILD development (e.g., methotrexate, azathioprine,
rituximab, and the tumor necrosis factor α–blocking agents). Specific
medications in many classes are also known to cause ILD, including

antibiotics (e.g., nitrofurantoin), antiarrhythmics (e.g., amiodarone),
and many of the antineoplastic agents (e.g., bleomycin).
Family History A family history of ILD (of almost any type) is
important to ascertain. The percentage of pulmonary fibrosis that is
familial, as opposed to idiopathic, varies by study, with estimates
ranging from <5% to as high as 20%. Despite this variability, most
agree that the presence of a close relative with an IIP is among the
strongest risk factors for IPF. Family studies have consistently noted
familial aggregation of diverse forms of IIP (such as IPF, nonspecific
interstitial pneumonia [NSIP], and DIP running in the same family)
and, in some cases, other forms of ILD. To date, the most wellreplicated genetic factors for pulmonary fibrosis (a promoter variant
of a mucin gene [MUC5B]) and various genetic determinants known
to influence telomere length (e.g., variants in the telomerase reverse
transcriptase gene [TERT]) (Chap. 482) appear to be associated
with both familial and idiopathic forms of pulmonary fibrosis similarly.
Social History A history of smoking is nearly always present in
some forms of ILD (e.g., respiratory bronchiolitis and desquamative
interstitial pneumonia [DIP]—sometimes referred by pathologists
jointly as smoking-related ILD) where it is felt to be causative. A
history of smoking is also noted in approximately three-quarters of
IPF patients. Occupational and environmental exposure histories are
also important to obtain as they might identify exposures known to
cause pulmonary fibrosis (e.g., significant asbestos exposure) or HP
(pigeon breeder’s lung).
■ PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
End-inspiratory fine crackles, or rales, noted at the lung bases are
found in most patients with IPF and may be one of the earliest signs
of the disease. However, rales are nonspecific and can be found in
many forms of ILD and other disorders. Wheezing is uncommon in
most forms of ILD but can be present in some disorders, such as
sarcoidosis, HP, and eosinophilic GPA. Signs of advanced disease
include cyanosis, digital clubbing, and cor pulmonale.

■ LABORATORY STUDIES
Laboratory studies can be particularly helpful in the workup for an
underlying CTD-associated ILD. As noted previously, these tests can
reveal the presence of an underlying CTD as the cause of an ILD
(e.g., a positive anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide [anti-CCP] antibody
for RA) even when no other symptomatology or physical examination
findings suggestive of the disorder are present. However, the costeffectiveness and the extent of laboratory testing that should be
ordered in various clinical contexts have yet to be determined (as
there is a relatively long list of autoantibody tests that could be
ordered).
■ PULMONARY FUNCTION TESTS
Most forms of ILD will eventually result in a restrictive deficit on
pulmonary function testing. A restrictive deficit is typified by a
reduced total lung capacity (TLC) and symmetrically reduced
measures of forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) and forced vital
capacity (FVC). A reduction in the diffusing capacity of the lung for
carbon monoxide (DLCO) is also common and may precede a
reduction in lung volumes; however, there is more measurement
variability in DLCO measurement and the test is less specific for ILD.
A reduced FEV1 to FVC ratio, which is diagnostic of airway
obstruction, is unusual in many forms of ILD but can be present as
an isolated finding or in conjunction with an additional restrictive
deficit in ILDs involving the airways such as sarcoidosis, HP, and
LAM. Although pulmonary function testing is rarely diagnostic,
reductions in lung function help to characterize the extent of disease,
and evidence for decline in repeated measures of pulmonary
function (e.g., FVC) has been correlated with an elevated rate of
mortality.
■ CHEST IMAGING STUDIES
Chest X-Ray Findings on CXR can be the first clinical indication that
an ILD might be present. For example, enlarged hilar lymph nodes
and a pattern of central nodular opacities in the mid to upper lung
zones can suggest sarcoidosis. A basilar reticular pattern, with small

cystic spaces, in the absence of clinical evidence for heart failure,
might suggest IPF. With a few exceptions, CXR alone rarely leads to
a specific diagnosis.
Chest CT High-resolution CT (HRCT) chest imaging is now
considered to be standard of care in the initial evaluation of a patient
with a suspected ILD. HRCT can be diagnostic for some ILDs (e.g.,
IPF) in the right clinical context and may preclude the need for, and
spare the patient the risk of, a lung biopsy. HRCT also helps to
define the extent of the ILD, determine the presence of more
concerning features suggestive of advanced disease (e.g.,
honeycombing), provide information on coexisting diseases (e.g.,
emphysema and lung cancer), and when not diagnostic, provide the
most useful locations for obtaining lung biopsy specimens.
■ LUNG BIOPSY
Fiberoptic Bronchoscopy Bronchoscopy can be helpful in
establishing a specific ILD diagnosis, and can help to establish an
alternate diagnosis, in select cases. Examination of serial lavage
fluid can be helpful in establishing DAH, which can be present in
ILDs with vasculitis (e.g., GPA), and in some cases, cellular
examination can suggest a specific diagnosis (eosinophilia >25% in
chronic eosinophilic pneumonia or fat globules in macrophages in
lipoid pneumonia). Transbronchial lung biopsies and lymph node
biopsies (in sarcoidosis in particular) can lead to a confident
diagnosis in patients with likely granulomatous lung disease (e.g.,
sarcoidosis and HP). However, in general, bronchoscopically
obtained tissue samples are often felt to be insufficient to diagnose
most of the IIPs. To date, studies have been mixed on whether
bronchoscopically obtained cryobiopsies, which can result in yields
larger than those obtained by transbronchial forceps biopsies, could
improve the diagnostic yield of bronchoscopy; however, the precise
role of cryobiopsies in the diagnostic workup of ILD has yet to be
clarified.
Surgical Lung Biopsy A surgically obtained lung biopsy specimen
can help solidify the diagnosis of ILD. In many cases, these are now

obtained through a video-assisted thoracoscopic (VATS) approach
(as compared to an open thoracotomy), which tends to reduce the
length of operative times and hospital stays. The diagnostic yield of
biopsies tends to be higher if obtained prior to treatment. The desire
to obtain a surgical lung biopsy should be weighed against the risks,
which can include a short-term mortality rate of as high as 5%.
These risks are reported to be higher in biopsies of patients
ultimately diagnosed with IPF and in those presenting acutely.
■ INDIVIDUAL FORMS OF ILD
The ILDs include a diverse group of lung pathologies that can be
subclassified into those disorders of unknown cause (e.g., IIPs) and
those of known cause (e.g., sometimes referred to as secondary
interstitial pneumonias [CTD-associated ILDs]) (see Fig. 293-1).
Although this remains a useful approach to classifying this diverse
group of disorders, it is important to recognize that genetic studies
are challenging this classic categorization. For example, numerous
ILDs commonly listed as having an “unknown cause” have been
determined to have significant genetic underpinnings (e.g., IPF and
LAM), while the pathophysiologic processes that result in ILDs of
“known cause” (e.g., CTD) remain incompletely understood.
Diagnosis is based on combined information obtained from a
patient’s clinical presentation, measures of pulmonary function,
imaging, immune serologies, and histopathology. It is important to
remember that prognosis and treatment vary widely by disorder (and
disease extent). In some cases, medical therapy that is felt to be
effective for some ILDs has been proven to be harmful for others.
Medical treatments range from immune modulators to antifibrotic
medications, whereas lung transplantation remains the standard of
care for patients with advanced and rapidly progressive ILDs.

IDIOPATHIC INTERSTITIAL PNEUMONIAS
■ IDIOPATHIC PULMONARY FIBROSIS
Clinical Manifestations IPF is the most common ILD of unknown
cause. Prevalence increases with age and is estimated at 50–

200:100,000. IPF is commonly diagnosed in the fifth or sixth decade
in life, affects men more than women, and is frequently associated
with a history of smoking or other environmental exposures. IPF is a
variably progressive disease that carries a poor prognosis with an
estimated 50% 3- to 5-year survival.
HRCT Image Findings Chest CT findings include subpleural
reticulation with a posterior basal predominance usually including
more advanced fibrotic features, such as honeycombing and traction
bronchiectasis. Collectively, these imaging findings are referred to as
a UIP pattern. The presence of extensive ground-glass opacities,
bronchovascular changes, micronodules, mosaic attenuation, or an
upper lung predominance should raise suspicion for an alternative
diagnosis (Fig. 293-2).

FIGURE 293-2 Chest CT imaging and interstitial lung disease. A. Idiopathic
pulmonary fibrosis (IPF): Classic findings of IPF (apparent on this image) include a
posterior, basilar predominance of subpleural reticular markings and more
advanced features of pulmonary fibrosis including traction bronchiectasis and
honeycombing. This constellation of findings is often referred to as a usual
interstitial pneumonia (UIP) pattern. B. Nonspecific interstitial pneumonia (NSIP):
Chest CT findings of NSIP can overlap with those of a UIP pattern but tend to
include a bilateral, symmetric pattern that presents with a greater percentage of
ground-glass opacities than is apparent in a UIP pattern. Additional unique findings
include more diffuse imaging abnormalities with a predominance not limited to the
lung bases, imaging abnormalities that spare the subpleural regions, and
thickening of the bronchovascular bundles (as is apparent in the right mid lung
zone on this image). C. Cryptogenic organizing pneumonia: Chest CT findings
include patchy, sometimes migratory, subpleural consolidative opacities (as is
apparent on this image) often with associated ground-glass opacities.
Peribronchiolar or perilobar opacities can be present, and sometimes a rim of
subpleural sparing (often referred to as a reversed halo or atoll sign) can be seen,
which can help to aid in the diagnosis. D. Sarcoidosis: Sarcoidosis can present
with varied imaging abnormalities, but a pattern of mediastinal and hilar
lymphadenopathy with a pattern of reticular-nodular opacities involving the
bronchovascular bundles (apparent in this image) are common features. Additional
findings can include diffuse small nodules in a miliary pattern, larger nodular
opacities, extensive ground-glass infiltrates, and mosaic attenuation suggestive of
small airways involvement, and, in more advanced cases, signs of pulmonary
fibrosis.

Histopathology Diagnostic VATS biopsy findings include subpleural
reticulation associated with honeycomb changes and fibroblast foci
(subepithelial collections of myofibroblasts and collagen). These
fibrotic changes alternate with areas of preserved normal alveolar
architecture consistent with temporal and spatial heterogeneity (Fig.
293-3). Collectively, these pathologic findings are referred to as UIP.

FIGURE 293-3 Histopathology of interstitial lung disease. A. Idiopathic
pulmonary fibrosis (IPF): Histopathologic findings include subpleural reticulation
associated with honeycomb changes alternating with areas of preserved normal
lung architecture referred to as temporal and spatial heterogeneity (as is apparent
in the low-power image above). Additional important diagnostic findings include
fibroblast foci, which are subepithelial collections of myofibroblasts and collagen
(as is apparent in the higher-powered inset of this image). Collectively, these
pathologic findings are referred to as usual interstitial pneumonia (UIP). B.
Nonspecific interstitial pneumonia (NSIP): Histopathologic findings of NSIP include
varying amounts of interstitial inflammation and fibrosis with a uniform appearance
(as is apparent in this image). Honeycomb changes are usually absent and
fibroblast foci are rare. NSIP is often referred to histopathologically as being either
predominantly cellular or fibrotic. C. Cryptogenic organizing pneumonia (COP):
Histopathologic findings of COP include patchy regions of organizing pneumonia
with granulation tissue that commonly involves the small airways, alveolar ducts,
and alveoli with surrounding inflammation that can involve the alveolar walls (as is
apparent in this image). D. Sarcoidosis: The hallmark histopathologic feature of
sarcoidosis is presence of granulomas (as are apparent numerously in the lowpowered image and more closely visualized in the higher-powered inset image).

Typically, these are referred to as noncaseating, which suggests the absence of
necrosis. Caseating granulomas are rare in sarcoid and should prompt additional
evaluation for an underlying infection. Because malignancy can result in a
granulomatous reaction, it is important to closely survey biopsy specimens with
granulomatous involvement for additional signs of malignancy.

Treatment Historically, IPF was felt to be refractory to medical
therapy with lung transplantation the only viable therapeutic option.
This dogma changed in 2014 with large clinical trials that
demonstrated that antifibrotic therapy (pirfenidone and nintedanib)
can slow decline of lung function in IPF patients. Further metaanalyses have suggested that antifibrotic therapy may also improve
survival. Trials now suggest that antifibrotic therapy may be broadly
effective in other forms of progressive pulmonary fibrosis as well. In
contrast, treatment with immunosuppression, which had been
commonly prescribed to many IPF patients, has now been
demonstrated (in some cases) to be associated with increased
morbidity and mortality. Physical therapy and supplemental oxygen,
when indicated, can improve exercise tolerance and reduce
likelihood of developing pulmonary hypertension. Lung
transplantation can extend survival and improve the quality of life in
a subset of IPF patients who meet criteria to undergo transplant.
■ NONSPECIFIC INTERSTITIAL PNEUMONIA
Clinical Manifestations Idiopathic NSIP is a distinct clinical entity
with characteristic clinical, radiologic, and pathologic features;
however, NSIP is also commonly observed in patients with CTD and
less frequently with familial interstitial pneumonia, drug toxicity, and
infection. Although the prevalence of NSIP is not well established, it
is commonly diagnosed in nonsmoking females in their fifth decade
of life. Positive serologic tests for CTD are frequently observed.
Idiopathic NSIP has a relatively good prognosis, with a 5-year
survival of >80%; patients with a predominant cellular NSIP pattern
have a more favorable prognosis than those with a fibrosing NSIP
pattern.
HRCT Image Findings Diffuse subpleural, symmetric, ground-glass,
and reticular opacities are common. Volume loss and traction

bronchiectasis involving the lower lung zones can also be found.
Occasionally subpleural sparing is noted, while peribronchiolar
thickening and honeycombing are uncommon.
Histopathology Diagnostic lung biopsy findings include varying
amounts of interstitial inflammation and fibrosis with a uniform
appearance. Honeycomb changes are usually absent and fibroblast
foci are rare. NSIP is often referred to histopathologically as being
either predominantly cellular (and potentially more responsive to
medical therapy) or fibrotic (and potentially less likely to resolve with
medical therapy).
Treatment Pulmonary fibrosis associated with CTD is commonly
treated with immunosuppression despite the paucity of randomized
clinical trials to demonstrate efficacy. Idiopathic NSIP is often treated
with oral steroids (prednisone), cytotoxic agents (mycophenolate,
azathioprine, and cyclophosphamide), or biologics (rituximab). Trials
now suggest that NSIP patients with progressive pulmonary fibrosis
may benefit from antifibrotic therapy. Oxygen therapy, pulmonary
rehabilitation, and lung transplantation may be required in patients
with progressive disease.
■ SMOKING-RELATED ILD
Although smoking-related ILDs, including respiratory bronchiolitis
with interstitial lung disease (RB-ILD), and DIP are frequently
subclassified with the IIPs, these disorders (along with PLCH, an ILD
with unique clinical, imaging, and histopathologic manifestations) are
commonly felt to be the result of active or prior tobacco smoke
exposure. DIP has also been known to occur in children with familial
pulmonary fibrosis (FPF). Smokers, particularly elderly smokers,
frequently have radiologic (centrilobular) interstitial abnormalities.
These interstitial abnormalities are often incidentally found on routine
CXR or chest CT studies in asymptomatic or minimally symptomatic
individuals. Respiratory bronchiolitis is felt to correlate
histopathologically with these imaging findings. However, in some
cases, these imaging findings can progress to more advanced

radiologic changes where more diffuse signs of interstitial
pneumonia tend to be present.
Clinical Manifestations These disorders predominantly occur in
active, and in many cases heavy, smokers who are typically between
40 and 50 years of age. In those ultimately diagnosed with RB-ILD or
DIP, dyspnea and cough are relatively common and symptomatic
wheezing is not rare. The prevalence of smoking-related ILDs is not
well understood, but they are generally felt to account for <10% of
the IIPs. While there are minimal data on the natural histories and
prognoses of these conditions, prolonged survival can be expected
in most patients with RB-ILD and death secondary to progressive
ILD is felt to be rare.
HRCT Image Findings Prominent and common findings in RB-ILD
include central bronchial wall thickening, peripheral bronchial wall
thickening, centrilobular nodules, and ground-glass opacities. Septal
lines and a reticular pattern are also not uncommon. Honeycombing
is generally felt to be rare (and indicates a worse prognosis). Similar
findings are noted in patients with DIP where diffuse (or patchy)
bilateral symmetric ground-glass opacities tend to be even more
prominent.
Histopathology Common features of RB-ILD include the
accumulation of pigmented macrophages within the lumens of
respiratory bronchioles and alveolar ducts, accompanied by chronic
inflammation of the respiratory bronchiolar walls and both
bronchiolar and peribronchiolar alveolar fibrosis causing architectural
distortion. These features are patchy and confined to the
peribronchiolar region. DIP tends to include similar changes but has
a more diffuse pattern characterized by pigmented macrophage
accumulation, pneumocyte hyperplasia, and prominent interstitial
thickening.
Treatment All patients with smoking-related ILD should be
counseled to discontinue smoking and/or encouraged to enroll in a
formal smoking cessation program. Small studies have evaluated,
and patients are often treated with, immunosuppressive (e.g.,

prednisone) and cytotoxic (e.g., azathioprine, and
cyclophosphamide) agents and, in some cases, bronchodilators. To
date, there is no strong evidence that these therapies result in
significant improvements in symptoms or measures of pulmonary
function or prevent clinical deterioration.
■ CRYPTOGENIC ORGANIZING PNEUMONIA
Clinical Manifestations COP typically involves patients in their 50–
60s and often presents as a subacute flulike illness, with cough,
dyspnea, fever, and fatigue. Inspiratory rales are often present on
examination, and most patients are noted to have restrictive lung
deficits on pulmonary function testing with hypoxemia. COP is
commonly mistaken for pneumonia. It is important to note that this
syndrome can occur in isolation, can be secondary to an underlying
CTD (e.g., polymyositis) or medications, or can result from an
underlying malignancy. Laboratory testing for various CTDs is helpful
as testing can both be diagnostic and suggest the need for
prolonged medical therapy.
HRCT Image Findings The most common imaging findings include
patchy, sometimes migratory, subpleural consolidative opacities
often with associated ground-glass opacities. Peribronchiolar or
perilobar opacities can be present, and sometimes a rim of
subpleural sparing (often referred to as a reversed halo or atoll sign)
can be seen, which can aid in the diagnosis.
Histopathology Surgical lung biopsy specimens tend to reveal
patchy regions of organizing pneumonia with granulation tissue that
commonly involves the small airways, alveolar ducts, and alveoli with
surrounding inflammation that can involve the alveolar walls (see
Fig. 293-3).
Treatment Corticosteroids can result in substantial clinical
improvement in many patients but usually need to be continued for
at least 6 months as relapse rates are high. Evidence is growing that
alternate cytotoxic (e.g., mycophenolate, cyclophosphamide) or
biologic (e.g., rituximab) therapies can be helpful in both treating the

disease and reducing the need for steroids. In some patients with
secondary forms of the disease, long-term therapy may be needed.

ACUTE OR SUBACUTE IIPS
■ ACUTE INTERSTITIAL PNEUMONIA (HAMMAN-RICH
SYNDROME)
Clinical Manifestations AIP is a rare and often fatal lung disorder
that is characterized by an acute onset of respiratory distress and
hypoxemia. A prodromal period of symptoms consistent with an
acute upper respiratory infection is common. The mortality rate
within 6 months of presentation can be quite high (>50%), and
recurrences are common. In those who recover, lung function
improvement can be substantial. AIP can be difficult to distinguish
from acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) and an acute
exacerbation of an unsuspected underlying pulmonary fibrotic
process.
HRCT Image Findings The most common imaging findings are
patchy bilateral ground-glass opacities. Dependent regions of airspace consolidation are also common.
Histopathology Similar to ARDS and acute exacerbations of
underlying pulmonary fibrosis, AIP presents histopathologically as
diffuse alveolar damage (DAD) demonstrated on a surgical lung
biopsy.
Treatment Treatment is mostly supportive and often includes
mechanical ventilation. There is no proven drug therapy for AIP.
Glucocorticoids are often given, but they are not clearly effective and
data on their use in other forms of DAD (e.g., ARDS) is controversial.
■ ACUTE EXACERBATIONS OF IIPS
Clinical Manifestations Acute exacerbations are not separate
disorders, but rather an accelerated phase of lung injury that can
occur in any ILD resulting in pulmonary fibrosis. Acute exacerbations
are most commonly described and most severe in patients with

known IPF. Acute exacerbations are characterized by an acute onset
(<30 days) of respiratory distress and hypoxemia occurring in a
patient with underlying pulmonary fibrosis not explained by an
alternate cause (e.g., pneumonia, left heart failure). Reported
mortality rates are very high (>85%), and mean survival periods
range from as little as days to months.
HRCT Image Findings The most common imaging findings include
patchy bilateral ground-glass opacities and dependent regions of airspace consolidation. Sometimes these new changes can be
appreciated on the background of the imaging findings typified by the
underlying IIP, although sometimes they obscure the preceding
imaging findings.
Histopathology Acute exacerbations of underlying pulmonary
fibrosis present histopathologically as DAD, although sometimes
organizing pneumonia can also be demonstrated on a surgical lung
biopsy.
Treatment Treatment is mostly supportive. Mechanical ventilation,
when not being used as a bridge to lung transplantation, is
controversial as the survival rate in these patients tends to be poor.
There is some evidence that drug therapy (e.g., nintedanib) may
reduce the rate of acute exacerbations in patients with IPF. Drug
therapy, in the context of an acute exacerbation, is also
controversial. Immunosuppressive (e.g., prednisone) and cytotoxic
(e.g., cyclophosphamide) therapies are commonly used without
proven benefit.

ILD ASSOCIATED WITH CONNECTIVE TISSUE
DISEASE
ILD is a common disease manifestation of many CTDs. Disease
progression, response to therapy, and survival are variable and
associated with specific radiologic and histopathologic patterns. ILD
occurs most commonly in patients with scleroderma (systemic
sclerosis form, or SSc), RA, polymyositis/dermatomyositis, and less

frequently Sjögren’s syndrome and systemic lupus erythematosus
(SLE). ILD may precede the development of extrapulmonary
manifestations of a specific CTD or may present as part of a poorly
defined CTD. In rare cases, lung manifestations may be the sole
feature of the patient’s clinical presentation.
■ SYSTEMIC SCLEROSIS
Clinical Manifestations (Chap. 360) ILD is the most common
pulmonary manifestation of SSc. ILD occurs in ∼50% of SSc patients
with diffuse disease and in ∼30% of patients with limited disease.
Pulmonary hypertension can occur separately or concomitantly with
ILD and is more frequent in patients with limited SSc.
HRCT Image Findings Similar imaging findings noted in both
patients with NSIP and IPF can be present, although findings
consistent with COP and DAD may also be present. Additional
HRCT findings may include a dilated esophagus and pulmonary
artery enlargement.
Histopathology Comparable to the imaging overlap, histopathologic
changes commonly noted in patients with NSIP and IPF are
frequently identified. Additionally, aspiration related to esophageal
dysmotility is common in SSc, and in these patients, histopathologic
findings consistent with COP and DAD may be observed.
Treatment Cyclophosphamide has a modest benefit in preservation
of lung function and is associated with significant toxicity.
Mycophenolate has recently been shown to have similar efficacy and
improved tolerability. Clinical trials have demonstrated that
antifibrotic therapy (e.g., nintedanib) may benefit patients with
systemic sclerosis associated pulmonary fibrosis. Minimizing the risk
of reflux by using high-dose proton pump inhibitors or antireflux
surgery should be considered in SSc with progressive ILD. Lung
transplantation can potentially be offered to select patients without
significant aspiration or chest wall restriction.
■ RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS

Clinical Manifestations (Chap. 358) A common extraarticular
complication of RA is ILD. Although RA is more common in females,
RA-ILD is more frequent in males and in patients with a history of
tobacco exposure. In a small subset of patients, ILD is the first
disease manifestation of RA. Clinically evident RA-ILD occurs in
nearly 10% of the RA population; however, up to 40–50% of RA
patients have radiologic abnormalities on chest CT, suggesting that
ILD in the context of RA may be underdiagnosed.
HRCT Image Findings The most common imaging pattern of ILD in
patients with RA is a UIP pattern, although NSIP patterns are not
uncommon. There is evidence that survival in patients with RA is
decreased in patients with a UIP pattern and among those with more
extensive fibrosis in general.
Histopathology Histopathologic findings of UIP and NSIP are most
common. Some studies suggest that UIP in the context of RA (as
compared to IPF) may present with a reduced number of fibroblastic
foci and an increased amount of germinal centers. Comparable to
the imaging findings, UIP (and DAD) patterns in patients with RA are
associated with reduced survival.
Treatment In contrast with SSc, there are no randomized clinical
trials testing the role of immune suppression in RA-ILD.
Extrapolating from the scleroderma experience, immunosuppressive
(e.g., prednisone) and cytotoxic (e.g., mycophenolate, azathioprine,
cyclophosphamide, and calcineurin inhibitors) agents have been
used with variable success. Clinical trials testing antifibrotic therapies
(pirfenidone and nintedanib) are presently being conducted. Lung
transplantation is a viable therapeutic approach for eligible patients
with progressive disease that is not responsive to medical therapy.
■ DERMATOMYOSITIS/POLYMYOSITIS
Clinical Manifestations (Chap. 365) The idiopathic inflammatory
myopathies are disorders characterized by immune-mediated
destruction and dysfunction of muscle; however, these disorders can
affect the skin, joints, cardiovascular system, and lung. The

prevalence of ILD associated with inflammatory myopathy varies by
report; however, ILD is present in up to 45% of patients with positive
anti-synthetase antibodies. The anti-synthetase syndrome is
characterized by positive anti-synthetase antibodies, myositis, fever,
Raynaud’s phenomenon, mechanic’s hands, arthritis, and
progressive ILD. There is a subset of anti–Jo-1 antibody–positive
individuals who can develop a rapidly progressive form of ILD
consistent with an acute exacerbation. Some studies have
suggested that ILD may be even more common in those with other
antibodies (e.g., anti-PL-12). Dermatomyositis/polymyositis can
occur as an isolated CTD or as a process associated with an
underlying malignancy.
HRCT Image Findings Common imaging patterns of ILD in patients
with dermatomyositis/polymyositis include those consistent with
NSIP with or without evidence for COP. A UIP pattern can also
occur. Some studies have suggested that a UIP pattern may be
more common among those with anti-PL-12 antibodies.
Histopathology The anti-synthetase syndrome is associated with
multiple histopathologic subtypes including NSIP, COP, and UIP.
DAD, a histopathologic pattern observed in AIP and acute
exacerbations, is associated with rapidly progressive ILD in myositis
patients.
Treatment Immunosuppressive (e.g., prednisone) and cytotoxic
(e.g., mycophenolate, azathioprine, cyclophosphamide, and
calcineurin inhibitors) agents are often used in patients with
progressive ILD. Some patients (particularly those with less fibrosis)
have been noted to have improved or resolved ILD in response to
medical therapy. In small studies, relapses have been more common
in patients treated with prednisone alone. Patients who fail immunesuppressive therapy can benefit from lung transplantation.
■ GRANULOMATOUS ILDS
The most common granulomatous ILD is sarcoidosis, a multisystem
disorder of unknown cause where lung involvement is often the most

dominant feature; sarcoidosis is discussed in Chap. 367. HP, a
granulomatous reaction due to inhalation of organic (e.g., bird
fancier’s lung secondary to exposure to bird feathers) and inorganic
(e.g., coal worker’s pneumoconiosis secondary to exposure to coal
dusts) dusts, is also an important and common cause of ILD and is
discussed in Chap. 288.
Granulomatous Vasculitides (See Chap. 64) These disorders are
characterized by blood vessels with inflammatory infiltrates and
associated granulomatous lesions with or without the presence of
tissue necrosis. The lungs are commonly involved, and a unique
feature of these disorders is that hemoptysis can be a presenting
symptom. Although laboratory testing is often helpful and can
provide specific information, biopsies of involved tissue can be
essential for making the diagnosis. Many of these disorders include
additional systemic manifestations. GPA, also referred to as
Wegener’s disease, is an example of a granulomatous vasculitis that
commonly affects the lung (including inflammatory infiltrates in small
to medium-sized vessels), ears, nose, throat, and kidney (resulting in
glomerulonephritis). Common imaging abnormalities of GPA include
nodules, patchy ground-glass and consolidative opacities that can be
migratory, and hilar lymphadenopathy. Eosinophilic GPA (EG; also
referred to as Churg-Strauss syndrome) is another example of a
granulomatous vasculitis that affects the lung (including eosinophilic
infiltrates in small to medium-sized vessels) and can result in
numerous clinical manifestations but frequently includes chronic
sinusitis, asthma, and peripheral blood eosinophilia. Common
imaging abnormalities of EG include peripheral consolidative
opacities that can be migratory and small pleural effusions.
■ GENETICS AND ILD
Studies of genetic epidemiology have led to important insights in our
understanding of ILD. First, studies of families with FPF have
demonstrated that unique IIPs can cosegregate with specific genetic
variants known to be associated with IPF. This suggests that many
genetic variants appear to predispose to interstitial lung injury
patterns more broadly than to unique diagnoses specifically. Second,

most of the genetic variants known to be associated with FPF are
also associated with more sporadic forms of the disease. Third, at
least one of the genetic factors most strongly associated with FPF
and IPF is both common and confers a large increase in the risk of
these diseases. At least one copy of a mucin 5B (MUC5B) promoter
variant is present in ∼20% of Caucasian populations and 35–45% of
patients with IPF and confers an approximate sixfold increase in the
risk of this disease. Fourth, studies of general population samples
demonstrate that imaging abnormalities suggestive of an early stage
of pulmonary fibrosis in research participants without known ILD are
not uncommon (occurring in ∼7–9% of adults) and are also
associated with the same genetic variants known to be associated
with IPF (e.g., the MUC5B promoter variant). This latter finding
suggests a path forward toward an early detection of IPF. Additional
genetic findings demonstrating replicable associations with
pulmonary fibrosis include numerous genetic variants in, and
adjacent to, genes known to be involved in the regulation of telomere
length (e.g., the TERT gene, the telomerase RNA component
[TERC] gene, and the regulator of telomere elongation helicase 1
[RTEL1] gene) and surfactant protein genes (e.g., surfactant protein
A2 [SFTPA2] gene) (Chap. 482).
Genetic studies have also provided some insights into other
forms of ILD. Genome-wide association studies of sarcoidosis have
demonstrated numerous variants in genes and in genomic regions
that are associated with the disease. Some of these diseaseassociated variants in sarcoidosis fall in human leukocyte antigen
(HLA) regions, in regions of genes involved in immune regulation
(e.g., interleukin 12B [IL12B]), and in regions of genes that are less
well understood (butyrophilin-like 2 [BTNL2]) but also appear to be
involved in T-cell activation. LAM is often associated with genetic
variants in the tuberous sclerosis complex genes (e.g., TSC1 and
TSC2), consistent with the known evidence that this disease can
occur in isolation but also in patients with known tuberous sclerosis.
Many genetic factors for rare diseases such as Hermansky-Pudlak
syndrome (a rare autosomal recessive disorder that results in
pulmonary fibrosis but also includes oculocutaneous albinism,

bleeding diatheses, and horizontal nystagmus) have also been
discovered (e.g., HSP1, and HSP3-7).
■ GLOBAL CONSIDERATIONS
The prevalence, clinical presentation, and natural history of most
ILDs in European countries resemble those described in the United
States. However, as expected, there is growing evidence for racial
differences in clinical (rate of acute exacerbations) and genetic
(MUC5B) attributes between Caucasian and Asian populations. To
date, there are limited data on the prevalence of ILD in Hispanics,
subjects of African descent, and many other ethnic groups.


294 Disorders of the Pleura Richard W. Light*

■ PLEURAL EFFUSION
The pleural space lies between the lung and the chest wall and
normally contains a very thin layer of fluid, which serves as a
coupling system. A pleural effusion is present when there is an
excess quantity of fluid in the pleural space.
Etiology Pleural fluid accumulates when pleural fluid formation
exceeds pleural fluid absorption. Normally, fluid enters the pleural
space from the capillaries in the parietal pleura and is removed via
the lymphatics in the parietal pleura. Fluid also can enter the pleural
space from the interstitial spaces of the lung via the visceral pleura
or from the peritoneal cavity via small holes in the diaphragm. The
lymphatics have the capacity to absorb 20 times more fluid than is
formed normally. Accordingly, a pleural effusion may develop when
there is excess pleural fluid formation (from the interstitial spaces of
the lung, the parietal pleura, or the peritoneal cavity) or when there is
decreased fluid removal by the lymphatics.
Diagnostic Approach Patients suspected of having a pleural
effusion should undergo chest imaging to diagnose its extent. Chest
ultrasound has replaced the lateral decubitus x-ray in the evaluation
of suspected pleural effusions and as a guide to thoracentesis.
When a patient is found to have a pleural effusion, an effort should
be made to determine the cause (Fig. 294-1). The first step is to
determine whether the effusion is a transudate or an exudate. A
transudative pleural effusion occurs when systemic factors that
influence the formation and absorption of pleural fluid are altered.
The leading causes of transudative pleural effusions in the United
States are left ventricular failure and cirrhosis. An exudative pleural
effusion occurs when local factors that influence the formation and
absorption of pleural fluid are altered. The leading causes of

exudative pleural effusions are bacterial pneumonia, malignancy,
viral infection, and pulmonary embolism. The primary reason for
making this differentiation is that additional diagnostic procedures
are indicated with exudative effusions to define the cause of the local
disease.

FIGURE 294-1 Approach to the diagnosis of pleural effusions. CHF,
congestive heart failure; CT, computed tomography; LDH, lactate dehydrogenase;
PE, pulmonary embolism; PF, pleural fluid; TB, tuberculosis.

Transudative and exudative pleural effusions are distinguished by
measuring the lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and protein levels in the
pleural fluid. Exudative pleural effusions meet at least one of the
following criteria, whereas transudative pleural effusions meet none:
1. Pleural fluid protein/serum protein >0.5
2. Pleural fluid LDH/serum LDH >0.6
3. Pleural fluid LDH more than two-thirds the normal upper limit for
serum
These criteria misidentify ∼25% of transudates as exudates. If
one or more of the exudative criteria are met and the patient is
clinically thought to have a condition producing a transudative
effusion, the difference between the protein levels in the serum and
the pleural fluid should be measured. If this gradient is >31 g/L (3.1
g/dL), the exudative categorization by these criteria can be ignored
because almost all such patients have a transudative pleural
effusion.
If a patient has an exudative pleural effusion, the following tests
on the pleural fluid should be obtained: description of the
appearance of the fluid, glucose level, differential cell count,
microbiologic studies, and cytology.
Effusion Due to Heart Failure The most common cause of pleural
effusion is left ventricular failure. The effusion occurs because the
increased amounts of fluid in the lung interstitial spaces exit in part
across the visceral pleura; this overwhelms the capacity of the
lymphatics in the parietal pleura to remove fluid. In patients with

heart failure, a diagnostic thoracentesis should be performed if the
effusions are not bilateral and comparable in size, if the patient is
febrile, or if the patient has pleuritic chest pain to verify that the
patient has a transudative effusion. Otherwise, the patient’s heart
failure is treated. If the effusion persists despite therapy, a diagnostic
thoracentesis should be performed. A pleural fluid N-terminal probrain natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) level >1500 pg/mL is virtually
diagnostic of an effusion that is secondary to congestive heart
failure.
Hepatic Hydrothorax Pleural effusions occur in ∼5% of patients
with cirrhosis and ascites. The predominant mechanism is the direct
movement of peritoneal fluid through small openings in the
diaphragm into the pleural space. The effusion is usually right-sided
and frequently is large enough to produce severe dyspnea.
Parapneumonic Effusion Parapneumonic effusions are associated
with bacterial pneumonia, lung abscess, or bronchiectasis and are
probably the most common cause of exudative pleural effusion in the
United States. Empyema refers to a grossly purulent effusion.
Patients with aerobic bacterial pneumonia and pleural effusion
present with an acute febrile illness consisting of chest pain, sputum
production, and leukocytosis. Patients with anaerobic infections
present with a subacute illness with weight loss, a brisk leukocytosis,
mild anemia, and a history of some factor that predisposes them to
aspiration.
The possibility of a parapneumonic effusion should be considered
whenever a patient with bacterial pneumonia is initially evaluated.
The presence of free pleural fluid can be demonstrated with a lateral
decubitus radiograph, computed tomography (CT) of the chest, or
ultrasound. If the free fluid separates the lung from the chest wall by
>10 mm, a therapeutic thoracentesis should be performed. Factors
indicating the likely need for a procedure more invasive than a
thoracentesis (in increasing order of importance) include the
following:
1. Loculated pleural fluid

2. Pleural fluid pH <7.20
3. Pleural fluid glucose <3.3 mmol/L (<60 mg/dL)
4. Positive Gram stain or culture of the pleural fluid
5. Presence of gross pus in the pleural space
If the fluid recurs after the initial therapeutic thoracentesis and if
any of these characteristics is present, a repeat thoracentesis should
be performed. If the fluid cannot be completely removed with the
therapeutic thoracentesis, consideration should be given to inserting
a chest tube and instilling the combination of a fibrinolytic agent
(e.g., tissue plasminogen activator, 10 mg) and deoxyribonuclease (5
mg) or performing a thoracoscopy with the breakdown of adhesions.
Decortication should be considered when these measures are
ineffective.
Effusion Secondary to Malignancy Malignant pleural effusions
secondary to metastatic disease are the second most common type
of exudative pleural effusion. The three tumors that cause ∼75% of
all malignant pleural effusions are lung carcinoma, breast carcinoma,
and lymphoma. Most patients complain of dyspnea, which is
frequently out of proportion to the size of the effusion. The pleural
fluid is an exudate, and its glucose level may be reduced if the tumor
burden in the pleural space is high.
The diagnosis usually is made via cytology of the pleural fluid. If
the initial cytologic examination is negative, thoracoscopy is the best
next procedure if malignancy is strongly suspected. At the time of
thoracoscopy, a procedure such as pleural abrasion should be
performed to effect a pleurodesis. An alternative to thoracoscopy is
CT- or ultrasound-guided needle biopsy of pleural thickening or
nodules. Patients with a malignant pleural effusion are treated
symptomatically for the most part, since the presence of the effusion
indicates disseminated disease and most malignancies associated
with pleural effusion are not curable with chemotherapy. The only
symptom that can be attributed to the effusion itself is dyspnea. If the
patient’s lifestyle is compromised by dyspnea and if the dyspnea is
relieved with a therapeutic thoracentesis, one of the following
procedures should be considered: (1) insertion of a small indwelling

catheter or (2) tube thoracostomy with the instillation of a sclerosing
agent such as doxycycline (500 mg).
Mesothelioma Malignant mesotheliomas are primary tumors that
arise from the mesothelial cells that line the pleural cavities; most are
related to asbestos exposure. Patients with mesothelioma present
with chest pain and shortness of breath. The chest radiograph
reveals a pleural effusion, generalized pleural thickening, and a
shrunken hemithorax. The diagnosis is usually established with
image-guided needle biopsy or thoracoscopy (Fig. 294-2).

FIGURE 294-2 CT scan from a patient with mesothelioma demonstrating a
mass in the left lung, a pleural effusion, pleural thickening, and a shrunken
hemithorax.

Effusion Secondary to Pulmonary Embolization The diagnosis
most commonly overlooked in the differential diagnosis of a patient
with an undiagnosed pleural effusion is pulmonary embolism.
Dyspnea is the most common symptom. The pleural fluid is almost
always an exudate. The diagnosis is established by spiral CT scan

or pulmonary arteriography (Chap. 279). Treatment of a patient with
a pleural effusion secondary to pulmonary embolism is the same as
it is for any patient with pulmonary emboli. If the pleural effusion
increases in size after anticoagulation, the patient probably has
recurrent emboli or another complication, such as a hemothorax or a
pleural infection.
Tuberculous Pleuritis (See also Chap. 178) In many parts of the
world, the most common cause of an exudative pleural effusion is
tuberculosis (TB), but tuberculous effusions are relatively uncommon
in the United States. Tuberculous pleural effusions usually are
associated with primary TB and are thought to be due primarily to a
hypersensitivity reaction to tuberculous protein in the pleural space.
Patients with tuberculous pleuritis present with fever, weight loss,
dyspnea, and/or pleuritic chest pain. The pleural fluid is an exudate
with predominantly small lymphocytes. The diagnosis is established
by demonstrating high levels of TB markers in the pleural fluid
(adenosine deaminase >40 IU/L or interferon γ >140 pg/mL).
Alternatively, the diagnosis can be established by culture of the
pleural fluid, needle biopsy of the pleura, or thoracoscopy. The
recommended treatments of pleural and pulmonary TB are identical
(Chap. 178).
Effusion Secondary to Viral Infection Viral infections are probably
responsible for a sizable percentage of undiagnosed exudative
pleural effusions. In many series, no diagnosis is established for
∼20% of exudative effusions, and these effusions resolve
spontaneously with no long-term residua. The importance of these
effusions is that one should not be too aggressive in trying to
establish a diagnosis for the undiagnosed effusion, particularly if the
patient is improving clinically.
Chylothorax A chylothorax occurs when the thoracic duct is
disrupted and chyle accumulates in the pleural space. The most
common cause of chylothorax is trauma (most frequently thoracic
surgery), but it also may result from tumors in the mediastinum.
Patients with chylothorax present with dyspnea, and a large pleural

effusion is present on the chest radiograph. Thoracentesis reveals
milky fluid, and biochemical analysis reveals a triglyceride level that
exceeds 1.2 mmol/L (110 mg/dL). Patients with chylothorax and no
obvious trauma should have a lymphangiogram and a mediastinal
CT scan to assess the mediastinum for lymph nodes. The treatment
of choice for most chylothoraces is insertion of a chest tube plus the
administration of octreotide. If these modalities fail, percutaneous
transabdominal thoracic duct blockage effectively controls most
chylothoraces. An alternative treatment is ligation of the thoracic
duct. Patients with chylothoraces should not undergo prolonged tube
thoracostomy with chest tube drainage because this will lead to
malnutrition and immunologic incompetence.
Hemothorax When a diagnostic thoracentesis reveals bloody
pleural fluid, a hematocrit should be obtained on the pleural fluid. If
the hematocrit is more than one-half of that in the peripheral blood,
the patient is considered to have a hemothorax. Most hemothoraces
are the result of trauma; other causes include rupture of a blood
vessel or tumor. Most patients with hemothorax should be treated
with tube thoracostomy, which allows continuous quantification of
bleeding. If the bleeding emanates from a laceration of the pleura,
apposition of the two pleural surfaces is likely to stop the bleeding. If
the pleural hemorrhage exceeds 200 mL/h, consideration should be
given to angiographic coil embolization, thoracoscopy, or
thoracotomy.
Miscellaneous Causes of Pleural Effusion There are many other
causes of pleural effusion (Table 294-1). Key features of some of
these conditions are as follows: If the pleural fluid amylase level is
elevated, the diagnosis of esophageal rupture or pancreatic disease
is likely. If the patient is febrile, has predominantly
polymorphonuclear cells in the pleural fluid, and has no pulmonary
parenchymal abnormalities, an intraabdominal abscess should be
considered.
TABLE 294-1 Differential Diagnoses of Pleural Effusions

The diagnosis of an asbestos pleural effusion is one of
exclusions. Benign ovarian tumors can produce ascites and a pleural
effusion (Meigs’ syndrome), as can the ovarian hyperstimulation
syndrome. Several drugs can cause pleural effusion; the associated
fluid is usually eosinophilic. Pleural effusions commonly occur after
coronary artery bypass surgery. Effusions occurring within the first
weeks are typically left-sided and bloody, with large numbers of
eosinophils, and respond to one or two therapeutic thoracenteses.
Effusions occurring after the first few weeks are typically left-sided
and clear yellow, with predominantly small lymphocytes, and tend to
recur. Other medical manipulations that induce pleural effusions
include abdominal surgery; radiation therapy; liver, lung, or heart
transplantation; and the intravascular insertion of central lines.

■ PNEUMOTHORAX
Pneumothorax is the presence of gas in the pleural space. A
spontaneous pneumothorax is one that occurs without antecedent
trauma to the thorax. A primary spontaneous pneumothorax occurs
in the absence of underlying lung disease, whereas a secondary
pneumothorax occurs in its presence. A traumatic pneumothorax
results from penetrating or nonpenetrating chest injuries. A tension
pneumothorax is a pneumothorax in which the pressure in the
pleural space is positive throughout the respiratory cycle.
Primary Spontaneous Pneumothorax Primary spontaneous
pneumothoraces are usually due to rupture of apical pleural blebs,
small cystic spaces that lie within or immediately under the visceral
pleura. Primary spontaneous pneumothoraces occur almost
exclusively in smokers; this suggests that these patients have
subclinical lung disease. Approximately one-half of patients with an
initial primary spontaneous pneumothorax will have a recurrence.
The initial recommended treatment for primary spontaneous
pneumothorax is simple aspiration. If the lung does not expand with
aspiration or if the patient has a recurrent pneumothorax,
thoracoscopy with stapling of blebs and pleural abrasion is indicated.
Thoracoscopy or thoracotomy with pleural abrasion is almost 100%
successful in preventing recurrences.
Secondary Pneumothorax Most secondary pneumothoraces are
due to chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, but pneumothoraces
have been reported with virtually every lung disease. Pneumothorax
in patients with lung disease is more life-threatening than it is in
normal individuals because of the lack of pulmonary reserve in these
patients. Nearly all patients with secondary pneumothorax should be
treated with tube thoracostomy. Most should also be treated with
thoracoscopy or thoracotomy with the stapling of blebs and pleural
abrasion. If the patient is not a good operative candidate or refuses
surgery, pleurodesis should be attempted by the intrapleural injection
of a sclerosing agent such as doxycycline.

Traumatic Pneumothorax Traumatic pneumothoraces can result
from both penetrating and nonpenetrating chest trauma. Traumatic
pneumothoraces should be treated with tube thoracostomy unless
they are very small. If a hemopneumothorax is present, one chest
tube should be placed in the superior part of the hemithorax to
evacuate the air and another should be placed in the inferior part of
the hemithorax to remove the blood. Iatrogenic pneumothorax is a
type of traumatic pneumothorax that is becoming more common.
The leading causes are transthoracic needle aspiration,
thoracentesis, and the insertion of central intravenous catheters.
Most can be managed with supplemental oxygen or aspiration, but if
these measures are unsuccessful, a tube thoracostomy should be
performed.
Tension Pneumothorax This condition usually occurs during
mechanical ventilation or resuscitative efforts. The positive pleural
pressure is life-threatening both because ventilation is severely
compromised and because the positive pressure is transmitted to the
mediastinum, resulting in decreased venous return to the heart and
reduced cardiac output.
Difficulty in ventilation during resuscitation or high peak
inspiratory pressures during mechanical ventilation strongly suggest
the diagnosis. The diagnosis is made by physical examination
showing an enlarged hemithorax with no breath sounds,
hyperresonance to percussion, and shift of the mediastinum to the
contralateral side. Tension pneumothorax must be treated as a
medical emergency. If the tension in the pleural space is not
relieved, the patient is likely to die from inadequate cardiac output or
marked hypoxemia. A large-bore needle should be inserted into the
pleural space through the second anterior intercostal space. If large
amounts of gas escape from the needle after insertion, the diagnosis
is confirmed. The needle should be left in place until a thoracostomy
tube can be inserted.


295 Disorders of the Mediastinum Richard W. Light*
The mediastinum is the region between the pleural sacs. It is
separated into three compartments (Table 295-1). The anterior
mediastinum extends from the sternum anteriorly to the pericardium
and brachiocephalic vessels posteriorly. It contains the thymus
gland, the anterior mediastinal lymph nodes, and the internal
mammary arteries and veins. The middle mediastinum lies between
the anterior and posterior mediastina and contains the heart; the
ascending and transverse arches of the aorta; the venae cavae; the
brachiocephalic arteries and veins; the phrenic nerves; the trachea,
the main bronchi, and their contiguous lymph nodes; and the
pulmonary arteries and veins. The posterior mediastinum is bounded
by the pericardium and trachea anteriorly and the vertebral column
posteriorly. It contains the descending thoracic aorta, the esophagus,
the thoracic duct, the azygos and hemiazygos veins, and the
posterior group of mediastinal lymph nodes.
TABLE 295-1 The Three Compartments of the Mediastinum

■ MEDIASTINAL MASSES
The first step in evaluating a mediastinal mass is to place it in one of
the three mediastinal compartments, since each has different
characteristic lesions (Table 295-1).

Computed tomography (CT) scanning is the most valuable
imaging technique for evaluating mediastinal masses and is the only
imaging technique that should be done in most instances. Barium
studies of the gastrointestinal tract are indicated in many patients
with posterior mediastinal lesions, becauseg hernias, diverticula, and
achalasia are readily diagnosed in this manner. An iodine-131 scan
can efficiently establish the diagnosis of intrathoracic goiter.
A definite diagnosis can be obtained with mediastinoscopy or
anterior mediastinotomy in many patients with masses in the anterior
or middle mediastinal compartments. A diagnosis can be established
without thoracotomy via percutaneous fine-needle aspiration biopsy
or endoscopic transesophageal or endobronchial ultrasound-guided
biopsy of mediastinal masses in most cases. An alternative way to
establish the diagnosis is video-assisted thoracoscopy. In many
cases, the diagnosis can be established and the mediastinal mass
removed with video-assisted thoracoscopy.
■ ACUTE MEDIASTINITIS
Cases of acute mediastinitis are usually due to esophageal
perforation, occur after median sternotomy for cardiac surgery, or are
infections descending from the neck, oral cavity, or facial area.
Patients with esophageal rupture are acutely ill with chest pain and
dyspnea due to the mediastinal infection. The esophageal rupture
can occur spontaneously or as a complication of esophagoscopy or
the insertion of a Blakemore tube. Appropriate treatment consists of
exploration of the mediastinum with primary repair of the esophageal
tear and drainage of the pleural space and the mediastinum.
The incidence of mediastinitis after median sternotomy is 0.4–
5.0%. Patients most commonly present with wound drainage. Other
presentations include sepsis and a widened mediastinum. The
diagnosis usually is established with mediastinal needle aspiration.
Treatment includes immediate drainage, debridement, and
parenteral antibiotic therapy, but the mortality rate still exceeds 20%.
■ CHRONIC MEDIASTINITIS

The spectrum of chronic mediastinitis ranges from granulomatous
inflammation of the lymph nodes in the mediastinum to fibrosing
mediastinitis. Most cases are due to histoplasmosis or tuberculosis,
but sarcoidosis, silicosis, and other fungal diseases are at times
causative. Patients with granulomatous mediastinitis are usually
asymptomatic. Those with fibrosing mediastinitis usually have signs
of compression of a mediastinal structure such as the superior vena
cava or large airways, phrenic or recurrent laryngeal nerve paralysis,
or obstruction of the pulmonary artery or proximal pulmonary veins. If
veins or arteries are involved, the placement of stents has relieved
the symptoms in many patients.
■ PNEUMOMEDIASTINUM
In this condition, there is gas in the interstices of the mediastinum.
The three main causes are (1) alveolar rupture with dissection of air
into the mediastinum; (2) perforation or rupture of the esophagus,
trachea, or main bronchi; and (3) dissection of air from the neck or
the abdomen into the mediastinum. Typically, there is severe
substernal chest pain with or without radiation into the neck and
arms. The physical examination usually reveals subcutaneous
emphysema in the suprasternal notch and Hamman’s sign, which is
a crunching or clicking noise synchronous with the heartbeat and is
best heard in the left lateral decubitus position. The diagnosis is
confirmed with the chest radiograph. Usually no treatment is
required, but the mediastinal air will be absorbed faster if the patient
inspires high concentrations of oxygen. If mediastinal structures are
compressed, the compression can be relieved with needle
aspiration.

296 Disorders of Ventilation John F. McConville, Julian Solway, Babak Mokhlesi

DEFINITION AND PHYSIOLOGY
In health, the arterial level of carbon dioxide (PaCO2) is maintained
between 37 and 43 mmHg at sea level. All disorders of ventilation
result in abnormal measurements of PaCO2. This chapter reviews
chronic ventilatory disorders.
The continuous production of carbon dioxide (CO2) by cellular
metabolism necessitates its efficient elimination by the respiratory
system. The relationship between CO2 production and PaCO2 is
described by the equation: PaCO2 = (k) (V̇ CO2)/V̇ A, where V̇ CO2
represents the carbon dioxide production, k is a constant, and V̇ A is
fresh gas alveolar ventilation (Chap. 285). V̇ A can be calculated as
minute ventilation × (1 – Vd/Vt), where the dead space fraction Vd/Vt
represents the portion of a tidal breath that remains within the
conducting airways at the conclusion of inspiration and so does not
contribute to alveolar ventilation. As such, all disturbances of PaCO2
must reflect altered CO2 production, minute ventilation, or dead
space fraction.
Diseases that alter (V̇ CO2) are often acute (e.g., sepsis, burns, or
pyrexia), and their contribution to ventilatory abnormalities and/or
respiratory failure is reviewed elsewhere. Chronic ventilatory
disorders typically involve inappropriate levels of minute ventilation
or increased dead space fraction. Characterization of these
disorders requires a review of the normal respiratory cycle.
The spontaneous cycle of inspiration and expiration is
automatically generated in the brainstem. Two groups of neurons
located within the medulla are particularly important: the dorsal
respiratory group (DRG) and the ventral respiratory column (VRC).
These neurons have widespread projections including the
descending projections into the contralateral spinal cord where they

perform many functions. They initiate activity in the phrenic
nerve/diaphragm, project to the upper airway muscle groups and
spinal respiratory neurons, and innervate the intercostal and
abdominal muscles that participate in normal respiration. The DRG
acts as the initial integration site for many of the afferent nerves
relaying information about PaO2, PaCO2, pH, and blood pressure
from the carotid and aortic chemoreceptors and baroreceptors to the
central nervous system (CNS). In addition, the vagus nerve relays
information from stretch receptors and juxtapulmonary-capillary
receptors in the lung parenchyma and chest wall to the DRG. The
respiratory rhythm is generated within the VRC as well as the more
rostrally located parafacial respiratory group (pFRG), which is
particularly important for the generation of active expiration. One
particularly important area within the VRC is the so-called preBötzinger complex. This area is responsible for the generation of
various forms of inspiratory activity, and lesioning of the preBötzinger complex leads to the complete cessation of breathing. The
neural output of these medullary respiratory networks can be
voluntarily suppressed or augmented by input from higher brain
centers and the autonomic nervous system. During normal sleep,
there is an attenuated response to hypercapnia and hypoxemia,
resulting in mild nocturnal hypoventilation that corrects upon
awakening.
Once neural input has been delivered to the respiratory pump
muscles, normal gas exchange requires an adequate amount of
respiratory muscle strength to overcome the elastic and resistive
loads of the respiratory system (Fig. 296-1A) (also see Chap. 285).
In health, the strength of the respiratory muscles readily
accomplishes this, and normal respiration continues indefinitely.
Reduction in respiratory drive or neuromuscular competence or
substantial increase in respiratory load can diminish minute
ventilation, resulting in hypercapnia (Fig. 296-1B). Alternatively, if
normal respiratory muscle strength is coupled with excessive
respiratory drive, then alveolar hyperventilation ensues and leads to
hypocapnia (Fig. 296-1C).

FIGURE 296-1 Examples of balance between respiratory system strength and
load. A. Excess respiratory muscle strength in health. B. Load greater than
strength. C. Increased drive with acceptable strength.

HYPOVENTILATION
■ CLINICAL FEATURES
Diseases that reduce minute ventilation or increase dead space fall
into four major categories: parenchymal lung and chest wall disease,
sleep-disordered breathing, neuromuscular disease, and respiratory
drive disorders (Fig. 296-1B). The clinical manifestations of
hypoventilation syndromes are nonspecific (Table 296-1) and vary
depending on the severity of hypoventilation, the rate at which
hypercapnia develops, the degree of compensation for respiratory
acidosis, and the underlying disorder. Patients with parenchymal
lung or chest wall disease typically present with shortness of breath
and diminished exercise tolerance. Episodes of increased dyspnea
and sputum production are hallmarks of obstructive lung diseases
such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), whereas
progressive dyspnea and cough are common in interstitial lung
diseases. Excessive daytime somnolence, poor-quality sleep, and
snoring are common among patients with sleep-disordered
breathing. Sleep disturbance and orthopnea are also described in

neuromuscular disorders. As neuromuscular weakness progresses,
the respiratory muscles, including the diaphragm, are placed at a
mechanical disadvantage in the supine position due to the upward
movement of the abdominal contents. New-onset orthopnea is
frequently a sign of reduced respiratory muscle force generation.
More commonly, however, extremity weakness or bulbar symptoms
develop prior to sleep disturbance in neuromuscular diseases such
as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) or muscular dystrophy.
Patients with respiratory drive disorders do not have symptoms
distinguishable from other causes of chronic hypoventilation.
TABLE 296-1 Signs and Symptoms of Hypoventilation

The clinical course of patients with chronic hypoventilation from
neuromuscular or chest wall disease follows a characteristic
sequence: an asymptomatic stage where daytime PaO2 and PaCO2
are normal followed by nocturnal hypoventilation, initially during rapid
eye movement (REM) sleep and later in non-REM sleep. Finally, if
vital capacity drops further, daytime hypercapnia develops.
Symptoms can develop at any point along this time course and often
depend on the pace of respiratory muscle functional decline.
Regardless of cause, the hallmark of all alveolar hypoventilation
syndromes is an increase in alveolar PCO2 (PACO2) and therefore in
PaCO2. The resulting respiratory acidosis eventually leads to a
compensatory increase in plasma bicarbonate concentration. The
increase in PaCO2 results in an obligatory decrease in PAO2, often
resulting in hypoxemia. If severe, the hypoxemia manifests clinically
as cyanosis and can stimulate erythropoiesis and thus induce
secondary erythrocytosis. The combination of chronic hypoxemia

and hypercapnia may also induce pulmonary vasoconstriction,
leading eventually to pulmonary hypertension, right ventricular
hypertrophy, and right heart failure.
■ DIAGNOSIS
Elevated serum bicarbonate (i.e., total serum CO2, which equals
calculated bicarbonate plus dissolved CO2) in the absence of volume
depletion is suggestive of hypoventilation. However, it is important to
point out that a serum bicarbonate level <27 mmol/L in the setting of
normal renal function makes the diagnosis of hypoventilation very
unlikely. By contrast, a serum bicarbonate level ≥27 mmol/L should
trigger clinicians to measure PaCO2 as a confirmatory diagnostic test.
Therefore, serum bicarbonate can be used as a sensitive test to rule
out hypercapnia, not to rule it in. An arterial blood gas demonstrating
elevated PaCO2 with a normal pH confirms chronic alveolar
hypoventilation. The subsequent evaluation to identify an etiology
should initially focus on whether the patient has lung disease or
chest wall abnormalities. Physical examination, imaging studies
(chest x-ray and/or CT scan), and pulmonary function tests are
sufficient to identify most lung/chest wall disorders leading to
hypercapnia. If these evaluations are unrevealing, the clinician
should screen for obesity hypoventilation syndrome (OHS), the most
frequent sleep disorder leading to chronic hypoventilation, which is
typically accompanied by obstructive sleep apnea (OSA). Several
screening tools have been developed to identify patients at risk for
OSA. The Berlin Questionnaire has been validated in a primary care
setting and identifies patients likely to have OSA. The Epworth
Sleepiness Scale (ESS) measures daytime sleepiness, with a score
of ≥10 identifying individuals who warrant additional investigation;
however, it is not a useful test to screen for sleep-disordered
breathing. Owing to its ease of use, the STOP-Bang questionnaire
has become a popular tool to screen for OSA and has been
validated in various outpatient settings. The STOP-Bang survey has
been used in preoperative anesthesia clinics to identify patients at
risk of having OSA. In this population, it has 93% sensitivity and 90%
negative predictive value. Additionally, the STOP-Bang questionnaire

has been validated as a screening tool for OSA in sleep and surgical
clinics. The probability of moderate and severe OSA steadily
increases with higher STOP-Bang scores.
If the ventilatory apparatus (lung, airways, chest wall) is not
responsible for chronic hypercapnia, then the focus should shift to
respiratory drive and neuromuscular disorders. There is an
attenuated increase in minute ventilation in response to elevated
CO2 and/or low O2 in respiratory drive disorders. These diseases are
difficult to diagnose and should be suspected when patients with
hypercapnia are found to have normal respiratory muscle strength,
normal pulmonary function, and normal alveolar-arterial PO2
difference. Hypoventilation is more marked during sleep in patients
with respiratory drive defects, and polysomnography often reveals
central apneas, hypopneas, or hypoventilation. Brain imaging (CT
scan or MRI) can sometimes identify structural abnormalities in the
pons or medulla that result in hypoventilation. Chronic narcotic use
or significant hypothyroidism can depress the central respiratory
drive and lead to chronic hypercapnia as well.
Respiratory muscle weakness has to be profound before lung
volumes are compromised and hypercapnia develops. Typically,
physical examination reveals decreased strength in major muscle
groups prior to the development of hypercapnia. Measurement of
maximum inspiratory and expiratory pressures or forced vital
capacity (FVC) can be used to monitor for respiratory muscle
involvement in diseases with progressive muscle weakness. These
patients also have increased risk for sleep-disordered breathing,
including hypopneas, central and obstructive apneas, and
hypoxemia. Nighttime oximetry and capnometry during
polysomnography are helpful in better characterizing sleep
disturbances in this patient population.
TREATMENT

Hypoventilation
Nocturnal noninvasive positive-pressure ventilation (NIPPV) has
been used successfully in the treatment of hypoventilation and
apneas, both central and obstructive, in patients with

neuromuscular and chest wall disorders. Nocturnal NIPPV has been
shown to improve daytime hypercapnia, prolong survival, and
improve health-related quality of life when daytime hypercapnia is
documented. ALS guidelines recommend consideration of nocturnal
NIPPV if symptoms of hypoventilation exist and one of the following
criteria is present: PaCO2 ≥45 mmHg; nocturnal oximetry
demonstrates oxygen saturation ≤88% for 5 consecutive min;
maximal inspiratory pressure <60 cmH2O; or sniff nasal pressure
<40 cmH2O and FVC <50% predicted. However, at present, there is
inconclusive evidence to support preemptive nocturnal NIPPV use
in all patients with neuromuscular and chest wall disorders who
demonstrate nocturnal but not daytime hypercapnia. Nevertheless,
at some point, the institution of full-time ventilatory support with
either pressure or volume-preset modes is required in progressive
neuromuscular disorders. There is less evidence to direct the timing
of this decision, but ventilatory failure requiring mechanical
ventilation and chest infections related to ineffective cough are
frequent triggers for the institution of full-time ventilatory support.
Treatment of chronic hypoventilation from lung or neuromuscular
diseases should be directed at the underlying disorder.
Pharmacologic agents that stimulate respiration, such as
medroxyprogesterone and acetazolamide, have been poorly studied
in chronic hypoventilation and should not replace treatment of the
underlying disease process. Regardless of the cause, excessive
metabolic alkalosis should be corrected, as serum bicarbonate
levels elevated out of proportion for the degree of chronic
respiratory acidosis can result in additional hypoventilation. When
indicated, administration of supplemental oxygen is effective in
attenuating hypoxemia, polycythemia, and pulmonary hypertension.
However, in some patients, supplemental oxygen, even at low
concentrations, can worsen hypercapnia.
Phrenic nerve or diaphragm pacing is a potential therapy for
patients with hypoventilation from high cervical spinal cord lesions
or respiratory drive disorders. Prior to surgical implantation, patients
should have nerve conduction studies to ensure normal bilateral
phrenic nerve function. Small case series suggest that effective
diaphragmatic pacing can improve quality of life in these patients.

HYPOVENTILATION SYNDROMES
■ OBESITY HYPOVENTILATION SYNDROME
The diagnosis of OHS requires the following: body mass index (BMI)
≥30 kg/m2; chronic daytime alveolar hypoventilation, defined as
PaCO2 ≥45 mmHg at sea level in the absence of other known causes
of hypercapnia; and evidence of sleep-disordered breathing. In
almost 90% of cases, the sleep-disordered breathing is in the form of
OSA, with close to 70% exhibiting severe OSA. Several international
studies in different populations confirm that the overall prevalence of
OSA syndrome, defined by an apnea-hypopnea index ≥5 and
daytime sleepiness, is ∼14% in men and 5% in women aged 30–70
years in the United States. Thus, the population at risk for the
development of OHS continues to rise as the worldwide obesity
epidemic persists. Although no population-based prevalence studies
of OHS have been performed, some estimates suggest it may be as
high as 0.4% of the U.S. adult population (or 1 in 263 adults).
Some, but not all, studies suggest that severe obesity (BMI >40
kg/m2) and severe OSA (AHI >30 events per h) are risk factors for
the development of OHS. The pathogenesis of hypoventilation in
these patients is the result of multiple physiologic variables and
conditions including OSA, increased work of breathing, respiratory
muscle impairment relative to the increased load because of excess
adiposity, ventilation-perfusion mismatching, and depressed central
ventilatory responsiveness to hypoxemia and hypercapnia. These
defects in central respiratory drive often improve with treatment of
sleep-disordered breathing with CPAP or NIPPV without any
significant change in body weight, which suggests that decreased
ventilatory responsiveness is a consequence rather than a primary
cause of OHS. The treatment of OHS is similar to that for OSA:
weight reduction and positive airway pressure therapy during sleep
with either continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) or NIPPV.
There is evidence that substantial weight loss (i.e., 20–25% of actual
body weight) alone normalizes PaCO2 in patients with OHS.
Unfortunately, achieving and sustaining this degree of weight loss

without bariatric surgery are very challenging for most patients.
Treatment with CPAP or NIPPV should not be delayed while the
patient attempts to lose weight. CPAP improves daytime
hypercapnia and hypoxemia in more than half of patients with OHS
and concomitant severe OSA. Bilevel positive airway pressure
without a backup rate (bilevel PAP spontaneous mode) should be
reserved for patients not able to tolerate high levels of CPAP support
or when obstructive respiratory events persist despite reaching the
maximum CPAP pressure of 20 cmH2O. NIPPV in the form of bilevel
PAP with a backup rate (bilevel PAP ST or spontaneous timed) or
volume-assured pressure support modes should be strongly
considered if hypercapnia persists after several weeks of CPAP
therapy with objectively proven adherence. Patients with OHS and
no evidence of significant OSA are typically started on bilevel PAP
ST or volume-assured pressure support modes, as are patients
presenting with acute decompensated OHS. Finally, comorbid
conditions that impair ventilation, such as COPD, should be
aggressively treated in conjunction with coexisting OHS.
■ CENTRAL HYPOVENTILATION SYNDROME
This syndrome can present later in life or in the neonatal period,
when it is often called Ondine’s curse or congenital central
hypoventilation syndrome (CCHS). Abnormalities in the gene
encoding PHOX2b, a transcription factor with a role in neuronal
development, have been implicated in the pathogenesis of CCHS.
Regardless of the age of onset, these patients have absent
respiratory response to hypoxia or hypercapnia, mildly elevated
PaCO2 while awake, and markedly elevated PaCO2 during non-REM
sleep. Interestingly, these patients are able to augment their
ventilation and “normalize” PaCO2 during exercise and during REM
sleep. These patients typically require NIPPV or mechanical
ventilation as therapy and should be considered for phrenic nerve or
diaphragmatic pacing at centers with experience performing these
procedures.

HYPERVENTILATION
■ CLINICAL FEATURES
Hyperventilation is defined as ventilation in excess of metabolic
requirements (CO2 production) leading to a reduction in PaCO2. The
physiology of patients with chronic hyperventilation is poorly
understood, and there is no typical clinical presentation. Symptoms
can include dyspnea, paresthesias, tetany, headache, dizziness,
visual disturbances, and atypical chest pain. Because symptoms can
be so diverse, patients with chronic hyperventilation present to a
variety of health care providers, including internists, neurologists,
psychologists, psychiatrists, and pulmonologists.
It is helpful to think of hyperventilation as having initiating and
sustaining factors. Some investigators believe that an initial event
leads to increased alveolar ventilation and a drop in PaCO2 to ∼20
mmHg. The ensuing onset of chest pain, breathlessness,
paresthesia, or altered consciousness can be alarming. The
resultant increase in minute volume to relieve these acute symptoms
only serves to exacerbate symptoms that are often misattributed by
the patient and health care workers to cardiopulmonary disorders.
An unrevealing evaluation for causes of these symptoms often
results in patients being anxious and fearful of additional attacks. It is
important to note that anxiety disorders and panic attacks are not
synonymous with hyperventilation. Anxiety disorders can be both
an initiating and sustaining factor in the pathogenesis of chronic
hyperventilation, but these are not necessary for the development of
chronic hypocapnia.
■ DIAGNOSIS
Respiratory symptoms associated with acute hyperventilation can be
the initial manifestation of systemic illnesses such as diabetic
ketoacidosis. Causes of acute hyperventilation need to be excluded
before a diagnosis of chronic hyperventilation is considered. Arterial
blood gas sampling that demonstrates a compensated respiratory
alkalosis with a near normal pH, low PaCO2, and low calculated
bicarbonate is necessary to confirm chronic hyperventilation. Other
causes of respiratory alkalosis, such as mild asthma, need to be

diagnosed and treated before chronic hyperventilation can be
considered. A high index of suspicion is required as increased
minute ventilation can be difficult to detect on physical examination.
Once chronic hyperventilation is established, a sustained 10%
increase in alveolar ventilation is enough to perpetuate hypocapnia.
This increase can be accomplished with subtle changes in the
respiratory pattern, such as occasional sigh breaths or yawning 2–3
times per min.
TREATMENT

Hyperventilation
There are few well-controlled treatment studies of chronic
hyperventilation owing to its diverse features and the lack of a
universally accepted diagnostic process. Clinicians often spend
considerable time identifying initiating factors, excluding alternative
diagnoses, and discussing the patient’s concerns and fears. In
some patients, reassurance and frank discussion about
hyperventilation can be liberating. Identifying and eliminating habits
that perpetuate hypocapnia, such as frequent yawning or sigh
breathing, can be helpful. Some evidence suggests that breathing
exercises and diaphragmatic retraining may be beneficial for some
patients. The evidence for using medications to treat
hyperventilation is scant. Beta blockers may be helpful in patients
with sympathetically mediated symptoms such as palpitations and
tremors.


297 Sleep Apnea Andrew Wellman, Daniel J. Gottlieb, Susan Redline
Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) and central sleep apnea (CSA) are
both classified as sleep-related breathing disorders. OSA and CSA
share some risk factors and physiologic bases but also have unique
features. Each disorder is associated with impaired ventilation during
sleep and disruption of sleep, and each diagnosis requires careful
elicitation of the patient’s history, physical examination, and
physiologic testing. OSA, the more common disorder, causes
daytime sleepiness and impaired daily function. It is a cause of
hypertension and is strongly associated with cardiovascular disease
in adults and behavioral problems in children. CSA is less common
and may occur alone or in combination with OSA. It can occur as a
primary condition, as a response to high altitude, or secondary to a
medical condition (such as heart failure) or medication (such as
opioids). Patients with CSA often report frequent awakenings and
daytime fatigue and are at increased risk for heart failure and atrial
fibrillation.
■ OBSTRUCTIVE SLEEP APNEA/HYPOPNEA SYNDROME
Definition OSA is defined on the basis of nocturnal and daytime
symptoms as well as sleep study findings. Diagnosis requires the
patient to have (1) either symptoms of nocturnal breathing
disturbances (snoring, snorting, gasping, or breathing pauses during
sleep) or daytime sleepiness or fatigue that occurs despite sufficient
opportunity to sleep and is unexplained by other medical problems;
and (2) five or more episodes of obstructive apnea or hypopnea per
hour of sleep (the apnea-hypopnea index [AHI], calculated as the
number of episodes divided by the number of hours of sleep)
documented during a sleep study. OSA also may be diagnosed in
the absence of symptoms if the AHI is ≥15 episodes/h. Each episode
of apnea or hypopnea represents a reduction in breathing for at least
10 s and commonly results in a ≥3% drop in oxygen saturation or a

brain cortical arousal. OSA severity can be characterized by the
frequency of breathing disturbances (AHI), the amount of
oxyhemoglobin desaturation with respiratory events, the duration of
apneas and hypopneas, the degree of sleep fragmentation, and the
level of reported daytime sleepiness or functional impairment.
Pathophysiology During inspiration, intraluminal pharyngeal
pressure becomes increasingly negative, creating a “suctioning”
force. Because the pharyngeal airway has no fixed bone or cartilage,
airway patency is dependent on the stabilizing influence of the
pharyngeal dilator muscles. Although these muscles are
continuously activated during wakefulness, neuromuscular output
declines with sleep onset. In patients with a collapsible airway, the
reduction in neuromuscular output results in transient episodes of
pharyngeal collapse (manifesting as an “apnea”) or near collapse
(manifesting as a “hypopnea”). The episodes of collapse are typically
terminated when ventilatory reflexes are activated and cause
arousal, thus stimulating an increase in neuromuscular activity and
opening of the airway. The airway may collapse at different sites,
such as the soft palate (most common), tongue base, lateral
pharyngeal walls, and/or epiglottis (Fig. 297-1). OSA may be most
severe during rapid eye movement (REM) sleep, when
neuromuscular output to the skeletal muscles is particularly low, and
in the supine position due to gravitational forces.

FIGURE 297-1 The structures causing airway collapse in obstructive sleep
apnea include the palate, the tongue, and/or the epiglottis. In addition, collapse
can also occur due to the lateral pharyngeal walls.

Individuals with a small pharyngeal lumen require relatively high
levels of neuromuscular activation to maintain patency during
wakefulness and thus are predisposed to airway collapse following
the normal sleep-related reduction in pharyngeal muscle activity
during sleep. The airway lumen may be narrowed by enlargement of
soft tissue structures (tongue, palate, and uvula) due to fat
deposition, increased lymphoid tissue, or genetic variation.
Craniofacial factors such as mandibular retroposition or
micrognathia, reflecting genetic variation or developmental
influences, also can reduce lumen dimensions. In addition, lung
volumes influence the caudal traction on the pharynx and
consequently the stiffness of the pharyngeal wall. Accordingly, low

lung volume in the recumbent position, which is particularly
pronounced in the obese, contributes to collapse (less caudal
traction). A high degree of nasal resistance (e.g., due to nasal septal
deviation or polyps) can contribute to airway collapse by reducing
intraluminal pressure downstream in the pharynx. High-level nasal
resistance also may trigger mouth opening during sleep, which
breaks the seal between the tongue and the palate and allows the
tongue to fall posteriorly and occlude the airway.
Pharyngeal muscle activation is integrally linked to ventilatory
drive. Thus, factors related to ventilatory control, particularly
ventilatory sensitivity, arousal threshold, and neuromuscular
responses to carbon dioxide (CO2), contribute to the pathogenesis of
OSA. A buildup in CO2 during sleep activates both the diaphragm
and the pharyngeal muscles. Pharyngeal activation stiffens the
upper airway and can counteract inspiratory suction pressure and
maintain airway patency to an extent that depends on the anatomic
predisposition to collapse. However, pharyngeal collapse can occur
when the ventilatory control system is overly sensitive to CO2, with
resultant wide fluctuations in ventilation, ventilatory drive, and upper
airway stiffness. Moreover, increasing levels of CO2 during sleep
result in central nervous system arousal, causing the individual to
move from a deeper to a lighter level of sleep or to awaken. A low
arousal threshold (i.e., awakening to a low level of CO2 or ventilatory
drive) can preempt the CO2-mediated process of pharyngeal muscle
compensation and prevent airway stabilization. A high arousal
threshold, conversely, may prevent appropriate termination of
apneas, prolonging apnea duration and exacerbating oxyhemoglobin
desaturation. Finally, any impairment in the ability of the muscles to
compensate during sleep can contribute to collapse of the pharynx.
The relative contributions of risk factors vary among individuals.
Approaches to the measurement of these factors in clinical settings,
with consequent enhancement of “personalized” therapeutic
interventions, are being actively investigated.
Risk Factors and Prevalence The major risk factors for OSA are
obesity, male sex, and older age. Additional risk factors include

mandibular retrognathia and micrognathia, a positive family history of
OSA, sedentary lifestyle, genetic syndromes that reduce upper
airway patency (e.g., Down syndrome, Treacher-Collins syndrome),
adenotonsillar hypertrophy (especially in children), menopause (in
women), and various endocrine syndromes (e.g., acromegaly,
hypothyroidism).
Approximately 40–60% of cases of OSA are attributable to
excess weight. Obesity predisposes to OSA through the narrowing
effects of upper airway fat on the pharyngeal lumen. Obesity also
reduces chest wall compliance and decreases lung volumes,
resulting in a loss of caudal traction on upper airway structures.
Obese individuals are at a fourfold or greater risk for OSA than their
normal-weight counterparts. A 10% weight gain is associated with a
>30% increase in AHI. Even modest weight loss or weight gain can
influence the risk and severity of OSA. However, the absence of
obesity does not exclude this diagnosis.
The prevalence of OSA is twofold higher among men than among
women. Factors that predispose men to OSA include android pattern
of obesity (resulting in upper-airway and abdominal fat deposition)
and relatively greater pharyngeal length, which increases
collapsibility. Premenopausal women are relatively protected from
OSA by the influence of sex hormones on ventilatory drive. The
decline in sex difference in older age reflects an increased OSA
prevalence in women after menopause. The pathogenesis and
presentation of OSA also differ in men and women: compared to
men, women have a lower arousal threshold and less neuromuscular
collapsibility. Women tend to have shorter duration of apneas and
apneas that occur predominantly in REM sleep. Failure to recognize
these differences can contribute to underrecognition of OSA in
women.
Variations in craniofacial morphology that reduce the size of the
posterior airway space increase OSA risk. The contribution of
skeletal structural features to OSA is most evident in nonobese
patients. Identification of features such as retrognathia can influence
therapeutic decision-making.
OSA has a strong genetic basis, as evidenced by its significant
familial aggregation and heritability. For a first-degree relative of a

patient with OSA, the odds of having OSA is approximately twofold
higher than that of someone without an affected relative. Several
genetic variants have been associated with prevalence of OSA or
with related traits, such as the frequency of apneas and hypopneas,
the duration of respiratory events, and degree of overnight levels of
hypoxemia.
OSA prevalence varies with age, from 5 to 15% among middleaged adults to >20% among elderly individuals, although in a
majority of affected adults, the disorder is undiagnosed. There is a
peak due to lymphoid hypertrophy among children between the ages
of 3 and 8 years; with airway growth and lymphoid tissue regression
during later childhood, prevalence declines. Then, as obesity
prevalence increases in adolescence and adulthood, OSA
prevalence again increases.
The prevalence of OSA is especially high among patients with
certain medical conditions, including diabetes mellitus, hypertension,
and atrial fibrillation. Individuals of East Asian ancestry appear to be
at increased risk of OSA at relatively low levels of body mass index,
reflecting the greater influence of craniofacial risk factors. In the
United States, African Americans, especially children and young
adults, are at higher risk for OSA than their white counterparts.
Course of the Disorder The precise onset of OSA is usually hard to
identify. A person may snore for many years, often beginning in
childhood, before OSA is identified. Weight gain may precipitate an
increase in symptoms, which in turn may lead the patient to pursue
an evaluation. OSA may become less severe with weight loss,
particularly after bariatric surgery. In adults, there is a gradual
increase in AHI with age, although marked increases and decreases
in the AHI are uncommon unless accompanied by weight change.
APPROACH TO THE PATIENT

Obstructive Sleep Apnea/Hypopnea Syndrome
An evaluation for OSA should be considered in patients with
symptoms of OSA and one or more risk factors. Screening also

should be considered in patients who report symptoms consistent
with OSA and who are at high risk for OSA-related morbidities,
such as hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and cardiac and
cerebrovascular diseases.
SYMPTOMS AND HISTORY

When possible, a sleep history should be obtained with assistance
from a bed partner or household member. Snoring is the most
common complaint; however, its absence does not exclude the
diagnosis, as pharyngeal collapse may occur without tissue
vibration. Gasping or snorting during sleep may also be reported,
reflecting termination of individual apneas with abrupt airway
opening. Dyspnea is unusual, and its absence generally
distinguishes OSA from paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, nocturnal
asthma, and acid reflux with laryngospasm. Patients also may
describe frequent awakening or sleep disruption, which is more
common among women and older adults. The most common
daytime symptom is excessive daytime sleepiness, identified by a
history of difficulty maintaining alertness or involuntary periods of
dozing. However, many women preferentially report fatigue rather
than sleepiness. Other symptoms include a dry mouth, nocturnal
heartburn, diaphoresis of the chest and neck, nocturia, morning
headaches, trouble concentrating, irritability, and mood
disturbances. Insomnia, which is common in the general
population, may coexist with OSA. Although difficulty falling sleep
is rarely caused by OSA, awakening at apnea termination may
cause difficulty maintaining sleep, a symptom more likely to be
reported by women than by men, and often responds to treatment
of OSA. Several questionnaires that evaluate snoring frequency,
self-reported apneas, and daytime sleepiness can facilitate OSA
screening. The predictive ability of a questionnaire can be
enhanced by a consideration of whether the patient is male or has
risk factors such as obesity or hypertension.
PHYSICAL FINDINGS

Physical findings often reflect the etiologic factors for the disorder
as well as comorbid conditions, particularly vascular disease. On
examination, patients may exhibit hypertension and regional

(central) obesity, as indicated by a large waist and neck
circumference. The oropharynx may reveal a small orifice with
crowding due to an enlarged tongue, a low-lying soft palate with a
bulky uvula, large tonsils, a high-arched palate, or
micro-/retrognathia. Since nasal resistance can increase the
propensity to pharyngeal collapse, the nasal cavity should be
inspected for polyps, septal deviation, allergic rhinitis, and other
signs of obstruction. Because patients with heart failure are at
increased risk for both OSA and CSA, a careful cardiac
examination should be conducted to detect possible left- or rightsided cardiac dysfunction. Evidence of cor pulmonale suggests a
comorbid cardiopulmonary condition; OSA alone is not thought to
cause right-heart failure. A neurologic evaluation is needed to
evaluate for conditions such as neuromuscular and
cerebrovascular diseases, which increase OSA risk.
LABORATORY FINDINGS

Diagnostic Findings Since symptoms and signs do not
accurately predict the severity of sleep-related breathing
disturbances, specific diagnosis and categorization of OSA
severity requires objective measurement of breathing during sleep.
The gold standard for diagnosis of OSA is an overnight
polysomnogram (PSG). A negative in-laboratory PSG usually rules
out OSA. However, false-negative studies can result from night-tonight variation in OSA severity, particularly if there was insufficient
REM sleep or less supine sleep during testing than is typical for
the patient. Home sleep tests that record only respiratory and
cardiac channels are commonly used as a cost-effective means
for diagnosing OSA. However, a home study may yield a falsenegative result if sleep time is not accurately estimated or in
individuals experiencing hypopneas with arousals rather than
oxyhemoglobin desaturation. Therefore, if there is a high prior
probability of OSA, a negative home study should be followed by
PSG.
The key physiologic information collected during a sleep study
for OSA assessment includes measurement of breathing (changes
in airflow, respiratory excursion), oxygenation (hemoglobin oxygen

saturation), body position, and cardiac rhythm. In addition, PSGs
and some home sleep studies measure sleep continuity and sleep
stages (by electroencephalography, chin electromyography,
electro-oculography, and actigraphy), leg movements, and snoring
intensity. This information is used to quantify the frequency and
subtypes of abnormal respiratory events during sleep as well as
associated changes in oxygen hemoglobin saturation, arousals,
and sleep stage distributions. Tables 297-1 and 297-2 define the
respiratory events scored and the severity guidelines employed
during a sleep study. Fig. 297-2 shows examples of sleep-related
respiratory events. A typical sleep study report provides
quantitative data such as the AHI (number of apneas plus
hypopneas per hour of sleep) and the profile of oxygen saturation
over the night (mean, nadir, time at low levels). Reports may also
include the respiratory disturbance index, which includes the
number of respiratory effort–related arousals in addition to the
AHI. In-laboratory PSG also quantifies sleep latency (time from
“lights off” to first sleep onset), the frequency of periodic limb
movements during sleep, sleep efficiency (percentage of time
asleep relative to time in bed), arousal index (number of cortical
arousals per hour of sleep), and time in each sleep stage. These
metrics can further characterize the severity of OSA, which is
associated with an increased arousal index, low sleep efficiency,
and a reduction of time in deep (stage N3) and REM sleep and
increase in light (stage N1) sleep. The detection of autonomic
responses to apneas and hypopneas, such as surges in blood
pressure, changes in heart rate, and abnormalities in cardiac
rhythm, also provides relevant information on OSA severity.
TABLE 297-1 Respiratory Event Definitions

TABLE 297-2 Obstructive Sleep Apnea/Hypopnea Syndrome
(OSAHS): Quantification and Severity Scale

FIGURE 297-2 Obstructive apnea. A. There are 30 s of no airflow, as shown in
the nasal pressure (n. p. flow) and thermistor-measured flow (t. flow). Note the
presence of chest-abdomen paradox, indicating respiratory effort against an
occluded airway. B. Central apnea in a patient with Cheyne-Stokes respiration
due to congestive heart failure. The flat chest-abdomen tracings indicate the
absence of inspiratory effort during the central apneas. C. Hypopnea. Partial
obstruction of the pharyngeal airway can limit ventilation, leading to
desaturation (a mild decrease in this patient, from 93 to 90%) and arousal. D.
Respiratory effort–related arousal (RERA). Minimal flow reduction terminated by
an arousal (Ar) without desaturation constitutes a RERA. EEG,
electroencephalogram; EOG, electro-oculogram; EKG, electrocardiogram.

FIGURE 297-3 Example of flow limitation. The inspiratory flow pattern in a
patent airway is rounded and peaks in the middle. In contrast, a partially
obstructed airway exhibits an early peak followed by mid-inspiratory flattening,
yielding a scooped-out appearance.

Other Laboratory Findings Various imaging studies, including
cephalometric radiography, upper airway MRI and CT, and
fiberoptic endoscopy, can be used to identify anatomic risk factors
for OSA. While these may be useful for planning surgical
interventions, they are not indicated in the routine evaluation of
OSA. Cardiac testing may yield evidence of impaired systolic or
diastolic ventricular function or abnormal cardiac structure.
Overnight blood pressure monitoring often displays a “nondipping”
pattern (absence of the typical 10% fall of blood pressure during
sleep compared to wakefulness). Arterial blood gas
measurements made during wakefulness are usually normal.
Waking hypoxemia or hypercarbia suggests coexisting
cardiopulmonary disease or hypoventilation syndromes. Patients
with severe nocturnal hypoxemia may have elevated hemoglobin
values. A multiple sleep latency test or a maintenance of
wakefulness test can be useful in quantifying sleepiness and
helping to distinguish OSA from narcolepsy.
Health Consequences and Comorbidities OSA is the most
common medical cause of daytime sleepiness and negatively
influences quality of life. It is also strongly associated with cardiac,
cerebrovascular, and metabolic disorders and with premature death.
This broad range of health effects is attributable to the impact of
sleep fragmentation, cortical arousal, and intermittent hypoxemia
and hypercapnia on vascular, cardiac, metabolic, and neurologic
functions. OSA-related respiratory events stimulate sympathetic
overactivity, leading to acute blood pressure surges during sleep and
nocturnal as well as daytime hypertension. OSA-related hypoxemia
also stimulates release of acute-phase proteins and reactive oxygen
species that exacerbate insulin resistance and lipolysis and cause an
augmented prothrombotic and proinflammatory state. Inspiratory
effort against an occluded airway causes large intrathoracic negative

pressure swings, altering cardiac preload and afterload and resulting
in cardiac remodeling and reduced cardiac function. Hypoxemia and
sympathetic-parasympathetic imbalance also may cause electrical
remodeling of the heart and myocyte injury.
HYPERTENSION OSA can raise blood pressure to prehypertensive

and hypertensive ranges, increase the prevalence of a nondipping
overnight blood pressure pattern, and increase the risk of
uncontrolled and resistant hypertension. Elevations in blood
pressure are due to augmented sympathetic nervous system
activation as well as alterations in the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone
system and fluid balance. Treatment of OSA with nocturnal
continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) has been shown to
reduce 24-h ambulatory blood pressure. Although the overall impact
of CPAP on blood pressure levels is relatively modest (averaging 2–
4 mmHg), larger improvements are observed among patients who
have a high AHI, report daytime sleepiness, or have resistant
hypertension.
CARDIOVASCULAR, CEREBROVASCULAR, AND METABOLIC DISEASES

Among the most serious health consequences of OSA may be its
impact on cardiac and metabolic functions. Strong epidemiologic
evidence indicates that OSA significantly increases the risk of
coronary artery disease, heart failure with and without reduced
ejection fraction, atrial and ventricular arrhythmias, atherosclerosis
and coronary artery disease, stroke, and diabetes. Treatment of OSA
has been shown to reduce several markers of cardiovascular risk
and improve insulin resistance and, in uncontrolled studies, is
associated with a decreased recurrence rate of atrial fibrillation.
Recent randomized clinical trials, however, have failed to
demonstrate that OSA treatment with CPAP reduces cardiac event
rates or prolongs survival. These outcomes may reflect exclusion
from these trials of patients with excessive sleepiness, as there is
evidence that sleepy patients may have the greatest OSA-related
cardiovascular risk. Limited adherence to treatment among trial
participants or the widespread use of other effective secondary
prevention measures, such as beta blockade, antiplatelet agents,

and lipid-lowering therapy, may also limit the impact of CPAP on
cardiovascular risk.
SLEEPINESS More than 50% of patients with moderate to severe OSA

report daytime sleepiness. Patients with OSA symptoms have a
twofold increased risk of occupational accidents. Individuals with
elevated AHIs are involved in motor vehicle crashes approximately
two to three times as often as persons with normal AHIs.
Randomized controlled trials have shown that treatment of OSA with
CPAP alleviates sleepiness as measured by either questionnaire or
objective testing in patients with both mild and more severe disease.
However, the degree of improvement varies widely. Residual
sleepiness may be due to several factors, including suboptimal
treatment adherence, insufficient sleep time, other sleep disorders,
or prior hypoxic-mediated damage in brain areas involved in
alertness. Moreover, visceral adipose tissue, which is present in
higher amounts in patients with OSA, releases somnogenic
cytokines that may contribute to sleepiness. Thus, even after
treatment, it is important to assess and monitor patients for residual
sleepiness and to optimize treatment adherence, improve sleep
patterns, and identify other disorders that may contribute to
sleepiness. Careful and supervised use of alerting agents may be
appropriate as adjunctive treatment in patients in whom sleepiness
does not respond to CPAP alone.
QUALITY OF LIFE AND MOOD Reductions in health-related quality of life

are common in patients with OSA, with the largest decrements
observed in scales that measure physical functioning and energy
levels. Work-related productivity also has been shown to improve in
patients with moderate to severe OSA treated with CPAP. Numerous
studies, including a large-scale trial of minimally symptomatic
patients, have shown that treatment with CPAP can improve these
patient-reported outcomes. Depressive symptoms, in particular
somatic symptoms (irritability, fatigue, lack of energy), are commonly
reported in OSA and improve with CPAP.
TREATMENT

Obstructive Sleep Apnea
A comprehensive approach to the management of OSA is needed
to reduce risk factors and comorbidities. The clinician should seek
to identify and address lifestyle and behavioral factors as well as
comorbidities that may be exacerbating OSA. As appropriate,
treatment should aim to reduce weight; optimize sleep duration (7–9
h); regulate sleep schedules (with similar bedtimes and wake times
across the week); encourage the patient to avoid sleeping in the
supine position; treat nasal allergies; increase physical activity;
eliminate alcohol ingestion (which impairs pharyngeal muscle
activity) within 3 h of bedtime; and minimize use of opiate
medications. Sedative hypnotic medications have inconsistent
effects on OSA but should be avoided in most patients with
moderate to severe OSA. Patients should be counseled to avoid
drowsy driving.
CPAP is the standard medical therapy with the highest level of
evidence for efficacy. Delivered through a nasal or nasal-oral mask,
CPAP works as a mechanical splint to hold the airway open, thus
maintaining airway patency during sleep. An overnight CPAP
titration study can determine the optimal pressure setting that
reduces the number of apneas/hypopneas during sleep, improves
gas exchange, and reduces arousals; however, the use of “autotitrating” CPAP devices used in home settings has eliminated the
need for titration sleep studies in many patients. Rates of
adherence to CPAP treatment are highly variable (average, 50–
80%) and may be improved with support by a skilled health care
team who can address side effects, help the patient “problem
solve,” and provide motivational education (Table 297-3). Despite
the limitations of CPAP, controlled studies have demonstrated its
beneficial effect on alertness, mood, quality of life, work-related
productivity, blood pressure, and insulin sensitivity. Uncontrolled
studies also indicate a favorable effect on cardiovascular outcomes,
cardiac ejection fraction, atrial fibrillation recurrence, and mortality
risk.

TABLE 297-3 Side Effects of Continuous Positive Airway
Pressure (CPAP) and Their Treatments

Oral appliances for OSA work by advancing the mandible, thus
opening the airway by repositioning the lower jaw and pulling the
tongue forward. These devices generally work better when
customized for patient use; maximal adaptation can take several
weeks. Efficacy studies show that these devices can reduce the AHI
by ≥50% in two-thirds of individuals, although these data are based
largely on patients with mild OSA. Some patients with moderate or
severe OSA respond to oral appliances as well, although no
consistent predictors of success have been identified in these
groups, and thus, follow-up sleep testing is recommended. Side
effects of oral appliances include temporomandibular joint pain and
tooth movement; thus, they require that the patient have adequate
dental and periodontal structures. Oral appliances are most often
used for treating patients with mild/moderate OSA or patients who
do not tolerate CPAP. However, as some patients are more
adherent to oral appliances than to CPAP, these devices are under
investigation for treatment of more severe disease.
Upper airway surgery for OSA is less efficacious than CPAP and
is mostly reserved for the treatment of patients who snore, have
mild OSA, or cannot tolerate CPAP. Uvulopalatopharyngoplasty
(removal of the uvula and the margin of the soft palate) is the most
commonly performed surgery for OSA and, although results vary
greatly, is generally less successful than treatment with oral

appliances. Upper airway surgery is less effective in severe OSA
and in obese patients. Success rates may be higher for multilevel
surgery (involving more than one site/structure) performed by an
experienced surgeon, but the selection of patients is an important
factor and relies on careful targeting of culprit areas for surgical
resection. Bariatric surgery is an option for obese patients with OSA
and can improve not only OSA but also other obesity-associated
health conditions. Other procedures that can decrease snoring but
have minimal effects on OSA include injection of a hardening agent
to the soft palate (resulting in stiffening), radiofrequency ablation,
laser-assisted uvulopalatoplasty, and palatal implants.
Upper airway neurostimulation is a recently tested alternative
treatment for OSA. Unilateral stimulation of the hypoglossal nerve
through a surgically implanted device was shown to significantly
decrease the AHI and improve a number of patient-reported
outcomes, such as sleepiness and quality of life, for a duration of at
least 5 years after treatment in carefully selected patients. This
therapy is reserved for patients who cannot tolerate or fail CPAP
therapy. Current inclusion criteria are moderate to severe OSA (AHI
15–65), BMI <32 kg/m2, and absence of complete concentric
collapse at the level of the velum documented by awake and druginduced endoscopy (a predictor of response to surgery). Additional
research is underway to further evaluate longer-term effectiveness
and potential utility of this treatment in other patient groups.
Supplemental oxygen can improve oxygen saturation, but there
is little evidence that it improves OSA symptoms or the AHI in
unselected patients. There is conflicting evidence regarding the
effect of supplemental oxygen on blood pressure in patients with
OSA.
CENTRAL SLEEP APNEA
CSA, which is less common than OSA, may occur in isolation or,
more often, in combination with obstructive events in the form of
“mixed” apneas. CSA is often caused by an increased sensitivity to
PCO2, which leads to an unstable breathing pattern that manifests
as hyperventilation alternating with apnea. A prolonged circulation
delay between the pulmonary capillaries and carotid

chemoreceptors is also a contributing cause; thus, individuals with
congestive heart failure are at risk for CSA. With prolonged
circulation delay, there is a crescendo-decrescendo breathing
pattern known as Cheyne-Stokes breathing (Fig. 297–2B). Other
risk factors for CSA include opioid medications (which appear to
have a dose-dependent effect on CSA) and hypoxia (e.g., breathing
at high altitude). In some individuals, CPAP—particularly at high
pressures—seems to induce central apnea; this condition is
referred to as complex sleep apnea or treatment-emergent central
sleep apnea. Rarely, CSA may be caused by blunted
chemosensitivity due to congenital disorders (congenital central
hypoventilation syndrome) or acquired factors. CSA is an
independent risk factor for the development of both heart failure and
atrial fibrillation, possibly related to elevations in sympathetic
nervous system activity that accompany this disorder; alternatively,
CSA may be an early marker of subclinical myocardial dysfunction.
Patients with CSA may report symptoms of frequent awakenings as
well as daytime fatigue. Treatment of CSA is difficult and depends
on the underlying cause. Limited data suggest that supplemental
oxygen can reduce the frequency of central apneas, particularly in
patients with hypoxemia, and ongoing clinical trials are further
evaluating supplemental oxygen for use in patients with heart failure
and CSA. Cheyne-Stokes breathing is treated by optimizing therapy
for heart failure. At this time, there is no good evidence that CPAP,
including adaptive servoventilation (a form of ventilatory support
that attempts to regularize the breathing pattern), improves health
outcomes in patients with Cheyne-Stokes breathing without OSA,
and in fact, it may be detrimental in those with heart failure
associated with reduced ejection fraction.

298 Lung Transplantation Hilary J. Goldberg, Hari R. Mallidi
■ END-STAGE LUNG DISEASE AND INDICATIONS FOR LUNG
TRANSPLANTATION
For the purpose of lung allocation score (LAS) prioritization for organ
allocation, the United Network for Organ Sharing (UNOS) divides
advanced lung disease diagnoses into four categories: (A)
obstructive lung disease (including non-cystic fibrosis-related
bronchiectasis and obliterative bronchiolitis), (B) pulmonary vascular
disease, (C) cystic fibrosis, and (D) restrictive lung disease.
Historically, obstructive lung disease was the most common
indication for transplantation, but since the implementation of the
LAS system, idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF), the most common
restrictive lung disease, has become an increasingly frequent
indication for transplantation. Prior to the era of antifibrotic therapy,
the average life expectancy from the time of diagnosis of IPF was 3–
5 years, making patients with this disease the cohort to experience
most clearly a survival benefit from lung transplantation. As a result,
the LAS system prioritizes patients with IPF. Similarly, patients who
experience secondary effects of their lung disease, including
pulmonary hypertension, right heart dysfunction, and hypercarbia,
are prioritized for allocation and should be considered for referral for
transplant evaluation irrespective of other markers of disease
severity.
Generally, the trajectory of decline and evolution of disease are
key indicators of the appropriate timing for referral and listing for lung
transplantation, rather than absolute thresholds of disease severity.
However, suggested guidelines for referral have been elucidated for
specific disease states. For example, in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease, the most common obstructive lung disease for
which transplantation is considered, the Body-Mass Index, Airflow
Obstruction, Dyspnea, and Exercise Capacity (BODE) Index is often
used as a marker of disease severity, with an index of 5 an

appropriate indication for referral for evaluation, and 7 for listing for
transplantation. Other suggested markers for transplant
consideration in obstructive lung disease include pulmonary function
test (PFT) data, such as a forced expiratory volume in 1 s of <25%
predicted. The frequency and severity of exacerbations of disease
should also be considered in determining the appropriate timing of
referral.
With the marked advances in medical therapy for pulmonary
vascular disease over the past decade, transplantation for
pulmonary vascular disease has become less frequent but is still an
important consideration for patients who progress despite, or are
refractory to, treatment. Functional assessments such as New York
Heart Association class III or IV limitations and hemodynamic
measurements such as cardiac index <2 L/min per m2 would
suggest consideration for evaluation and listing. Patients with
diagnoses generally poorly responsive to therapy such as pulmonary
veno-occlusive disease should be referred early for evaluation.
Patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) have historically been
considered for evaluation when the FEV1 reaches approximately
30% predicted. However, with the exciting development of therapies
targeting the CF transmembrane receptor, providers should keep in
mind the potential for improvement in pulmonary function after
treatment initiation. Despite this potential for pharmacotherapeutic
response, referral and completion of testing should be considered so
that patients are prepared for listing should they fail to see
improvement or experience worsening of disease on therapy.
Moreover, patients who experience acceleration of acute
exacerbation rate, recurrent hemoptysis, worsening functional and/or
nutritional status, or colonization with resistant bacteria should also
be assessed for transplantation irrespective of pulmonary function
results.
Despite treatment progress with the development of antifibrotic
therapy for IPF and other progressive fibrosing interstitial lung
diseases, these therapies do not reverse the disease but only slow
the rate of lung function decline. Therefore, transplant referral for
patients with IPF and other fibrosing lung diseases should still be
considered at the time of diagnosis. Forced vital capacity <80%

predicted or diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide <40% predicted,
failure to respond to medical therapy, decline in pulmonary function
tests on therapy, and functional decline are additional indications for
transplant consideration in patients with other restrictive lung
diseases.
■ CONTRAINDICATIONS TO LUNG TRANSPLANTATION
Absolute Contraindications As experience with lung
transplantation increases, and as lung allocation policy prioritizes
patients with higher acuity of disease and with diseases affecting
older age groups, recipient selection criteria have become more
liberal compared to prior eras. While published guidelines suggest
absolute and relative contraindications to transplantation, these
criteria are in constant evolution, and each program ultimately
establishes its own selection algorithms based upon clinical
expertise, experience, program size and resources, and referral
patterns.
Examples of absolute contraindications to lung transplantation
(Table 298-1) include anatomic and technical considerations that
would affect the ability to complete the transplant procedure, such as
chest wall or spinal deformities or malacia of the large airways.
Surgical input is critical in making such determinations. In addition,
untreatable and/or irreversible organ dysfunction may preclude
isolated lung transplantation. Cirrhosis of the liver, uncorrectable
disease of the coronary arteries not amenable to combined surgical
intervention during the transplant procedure, or other forms of
uncorrectable atherosclerotic or vascular disease may make
transplantation too high risk for consideration. Renal dysfunction is of
particular concern given the known nephrotoxicity of calcineurin
inhibitors, which are the mainstay of posttransplant immune
suppression.
TABLE 298-1 Contraindications to Lung Transplantation

Relative Contraindications Age in and of itself is typically not a
contraindication to transplantation at most centers. However, older
patients with significant medical comorbidities may be at prohibitive
risk for transplantation, and functional status and frailty may worsen
in this setting. Published analyses of the Scientific Registry of

Transplant Recipients, a comprehensive database of transplant
outcomes, have consistently shown that functional capacity, as
assessed by 6-minute walk distance, is inversely correlated with both
wait list and posttransplant mortality. As a result, most programs
utilize some assessment of functional status as a criterion for
transplant candidacy.
Frailty, independent of walk distance, has also been recognized
increasingly as a marker of poor outcome after lung transplantation,
and can be assessed using a number of instruments, including the
Short Physical Performance Battery (SPPB), Fried Frailty Phenotype
(FFP), and others. Most studies utilizing these instruments have
been conducted at single centers. While both SPPB and FFP have
been shown to correlate with the LAS, FFP has a stronger
correlation, and SPPB and FFP may not correlate with each other.
Further study is needed to determine prospectively the relationship
between these measures assessed in the pretransplant setting and
posttransplant outcomes.
Patients with a history of malignancy are generally required to
have experienced a period of remission prior to consideration for
transplantation. The necessary length of disease-free survival should
be determined in the context of the type of malignancy, stage at
diagnosis, and likelihood of recurrence, and often varies by program.
A history of respiratory infection and colonization with resistant
organisms is of particular concern in the CF and bronchiectasis
populations, although it could affect patients with any advanced lung
disease and a history of respiratory infection. Data on outcomes in
the presence of resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection are
conflicting, but in general, patients who have demonstrated a
response to an antimicrobial regimen, even if colonized with resistant
organisms, can be considered for transplantation. Burkholderia
cepacia complex, another group of gram-negative organisms that
can infect patients with CF, also presents a unique concern for
transplantation. Data show that B. cenocepacia (formerly known as
Genomovar III) portends the highest risk posttransplant, often
leading to bacteremia, abscess formation, and early mortality. B.
dolosa and gladioli may cause similar posttransplant complications.
Patients colonized with other Burkholderia species appear to have

posttransplant outcomes comparable with the noncolonized
population, and, therefore, can be considered for transplantation.
Published guidelines suggest that those programs offering
transplantation to patients colonized with B. cenocepacia do so
under a research structure and after a specific discussion of the risks
of transplantation in this setting with the patients. Other infectious
considerations in lung transplant candidates include mycobacterial
infections, particularly with rapidly growing organisms such as M.
abscessus, which can lead to chronic, refractory infections and
infections of the chest wall. In the case of fungal infection,
assessment of the pathogenicity of the organism, resistance
patterns, and, in some cases, responsiveness to pretransplant
treatment, is beneficial in determining the safety of transplantation.
A history of viral infections such as hepatitis and human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) is generally not considered a
contraindication to transplantation. Demonstration of adequate
control of infection and responsiveness to therapy are important in
preparation for transplantation, and development of a treatment plan
that minimizes toxicity and drug interactions, in consultation with
transplant pharmacy, should be completed prior to placement on the
wait list. Collaborative assessment with transplant infectious disease
experts is beneficial whenever the infectious history is a concern for
transplant safety.
Nutritional status is another important element to assess in
determining candidacy for lung transplantation. Nutritional status has
been shown to have a U-shaped relationship with transplant
outcomes, with increased mortality risk associated with both
underweight (BMI <18) and obesity (specifically BMI >35).
Consultation with nutritional experts may allow for modification of this
risk prior to transplant. In some underweight patients, placement of
an enteral feeding tube and initiation of enteral feedings may be
considered.
Psychosocial assessment is also a key component of the
evaluation of patients under consideration for lung transplantation,
and a multidisciplinary approach with transplant social work,
psychiatry, and financial care coordination is often helpful.
Assessment for and optimization of psychiatric disorders such as

anxiety and depression, which can be exacerbated in the setting of
transplantation, substance abuse disorders, and compliance with
medical therapy recommendations are all important parts of the
pretransplant evaluation. Perioperative pain management planning in
the setting of medical therapy for opioid use disorder may require
additional multidisciplinary input, but the need for this management
plan alone should not preclude transplantation. Transplant
candidates require a strong support system given their potential
posttransplant care needs. Additionally, confirmation of insurance
coverage for all phases of transplant care, expected medication
copayments, and financial resources to support other expenses in
the setting of transplantation should be completed during the
transplant evaluation. Fundraising opportunities and subsidies for
medications may need to be pursued in order to proceed safely with
listing.
■ LUNG TRANSPLANT CANDIDATE MANAGEMENT
Lung transplant candidates need meticulous and exquisite medical
care to ensure that they are in excellent condition at the time of
transplant. Oxygen is prescribed to maintain adequate systemic
oxygenation to allow for moderate physical activity and exertion.
Patients should be enrolled in pulmonary rehabilitation programs, if
available, and should continue to participate in daily physical
exercises. Fluid management is important to consider and restriction
of free water and salt intake is recommended.
Patients with pulmonary vascular disease and severe pulmonary
hypertension awaiting lung transplantation need special attention to
maintain adequate right ventricular function. The use of pulmonary
vasodilator therapy is recommended and should not be stopped prior
to transplant. Patients who develop secondary pulmonary
hypertension should also be assessed for the utility of direct
pulmonary vasodilator therapy. Periodic assessment of right
ventricular function with echocardiography is recommended, and in
patients with clearly worsening ventricular function, right heart
catheterization and assessment for responsiveness to short-acting
vasodilator therapy should be considered.

In restrictive lung disease patients awaiting transplant,
consideration should be given to continuation of immune modulators
and/or antifibrotic therapy. Studies are ongoing to determine the
impact of antifibrotic therapy on posttransplant wound healing.
Additionally, increased pulmonary vascular resistance can occur in
these patients as the disease progresses, and acute exacerbations
have been shown to be associated with severe acute decrease in
right ventricular function. Steroids have been utilized in the
management of acute exacerbations; however, the negative
sequelae of chronic steroid use on wound healing is well
established. Therefore, steroid use should be limited as much as
possible, and if unavoidable, should be tapered rapidly.
Patients with CF can have pancreatic dysfunction leading to
difficulty in maintaining normal blood glucose levels; uncontrolled
diabetes mellitus can make the management of posttransplant blood
glucose very challenging. Therefore, optimization of diabetes
management should be pursued prior to transplantation.
Despite optimal medical therapy, the underlying disease in waitlisted patients will almost always continue to worsen. Prioritization of
patients awaiting lung transplant is determined by the LAS. The
score is generated by giving weight to risk factors associated with
predicted mortality while on the wait list while also accounting for the
expected posttransplant survival of the patient. This composite score
is then normalized to generate a score between 0 and 100. The
higher the score, the more prioritized the patient, and the higher the
probability of a suitable donor match for the recipient. The main
factors that influence the LAS are the underlying diagnosis of the
patient (such as restrictive lung disease, as mentioned above), the
demographics of the patient (gender and age), and the patient’s
current clinical status. The more acutely ill the patient (the patient’s
oxygen requirements, pulmonary hypertension, use of invasive
support systems such as mechanical circulatory support or
ventilatory support, limited mobility, lack of independence with
activities of daily living), the higher the score. This results in a
system of organ allocation that is most efficient at ensuring that the
sickest patients receive the organs available. However, despite this
prioritization strategy, patients continue to expire at a rate of 10–12

patient deaths per 100 patient-years on the wait list. It is critical for
the best outcomes in these patients that ongoing clinical assessment
and frequent updates of the LAS are routine aspects of their
management.
A major consequence of improved efficiency in matching the
sickest patients to the available pool of donors has been an
increased use of extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO)
devices to bridge the most critically ill patients to transplant.
Mechanical circulatory support with ECMO allows for patients to be
potentially weaned from the ventilator, to maintain physical activity
and ambulation, and to be in a state of greater robustness as they
await transplant. The posttransplant survival rate of patients bridged
to transplant with ECMO is lower than patients transplanted without
the need for ECMO but better than patients who had previously been
transplanted directly from mechanical ventilatory support.
Furthermore, with improvements in membrane oxygenator
technology, platform miniaturization, and improvements in cannula
design, outcomes continue to improve.
■ DONOR CONSIDERATIONS
The ideal lung donor has remained constant since the inception of
lung transplantation in the 1980s (Table 298-2). A donor between
25–40 years of age, with a PaO2/FiO2 ratio >350, no smoking
history, a clear chest x-ray, clean bronchoscopy, and minimal
ischemic time is considered the ideal donor; however, it is quite rare
that a donor meets all of these criteria for transplantation. In fact, the
vast majority of donor lungs used for transplant fall outside these
ideal lung donor criteria as established more than three decades
ago. Donors must have irreversible brain injury, and the majority of
donors are brain dead. Only 20% of all donors with brain death are
suitable lung donors due to the development of severe neurogenic
pulmonary edema and increased susceptibility of potential lung
allografts to infection and injury.
TABLE 298-2 Characteristics of the Ideal Lung Donor

Absolute contraindications to lung donation include radiographic
evidence of chronic lung disease such as emphysema and
pulmonary fibrosis. Other absolute contraindications include active
malignancy, a donor history of severe asthma requiring multiple
hospitalizations, and positive HIV status. Relative contraindications
include older donor age, severe thoracic trauma with extensive
pulmonary contusions, the presence of pulmonary hypertension, and
prolonged donor hypotension or acute hypoxemia.
The standard lung donor evaluation includes a donor medical and
social history, physical examination, and laboratory examination.
Chest imaging is mandatory, as are arterial blood gases,
bronchoscopy, and serological tests for cytomegalovirus (CMV),
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), hepatitis B and C, HIV, toxoplasma, rapid
plasma reagin, and herpes simplex virus. The presence of
consolidation and atelectasis, while not absolute contraindications to
transplant, are often difficult to assess with noncontrast radiographic
imaging alone. Ventilation parameters must be evaluated to ensure
adequate compliance of the donor lungs, with peak airway pressures
<30 cmH2O being ideal. Direct on-site inspection of the lungs and
assessment for nodules, compliance, and full expansion are the final
necessary steps before acceptance of donor lungs for transplant.
More recently, there has been an expanded use of allografts from
donors after cardiac death (DCD) due to the ability to rehabilitate
donor lungs using ex vivo lung perfusion (EVLP). DCD donors are

patients who present with irreversible brain injury but without overt
brain death. The potential donor allografts are often exposed to a
period of prolonged warm ischemia during the donation process;
there has been a concern about early graft dysfunction after DCD
donation. Steen and colleagues in Lund demonstrated that EVLP
could be used to assess these marginal donors prior to transplant.
The landmark publication of the Normothermic Ex Vivo Lung
Perfusion in Clinical Lung Transplantation trial in 2011 generated
renewed interest in DCD lung donors. The group from the University
of Toronto was also able to demonstrate that brain-dead donors with
unacceptable donor lung parameters could be rehabilitated with the
use of EVLP. They were able to salvage up to 50% of selected
unsuitable donor lung allografts with the use of acellular
normothermic hyperosmotic perfusion with excellent short-term
outcomes.
Donor Management Brain death causes severe perturbations in the
potential donor lung allograft function. The development of severe
pulmonary edema often accompanies brain death. The
hemodynamic instability and neurogenic shock that can accompany
brain death are also major stressors on the preservation of donor
allograft function. The primary goal of donor management is,
therefore, the maintenance of hemodynamic stability and
preservation of donor lung function. Judicious fluid resuscitation and
avoidance of excessive resuscitation should be employed. Volume
replenishment should be limited to maintain the central venous
pressure between 5 and 8 mmHg. In general, crystalloid fluid
boluses are to be avoided. Diabetes insipidus is common in donors
and requires the use of intravenous vasopressin to prevent
excessive urine loss. In general, blood transfusions should be
avoided; however, if necessary, CMV-negative and leukocyte-filtered
blood should be used whenever possible. Hypothermia should be
avoided as it predisposes to ventricular arrhythmias and metabolic
acidosis.
Excessive oxygen delivery should be minimized to prevent freeradical injury to the potential lung allograft. Positive end-expiratory
pressures on the ventilator should be maintained to avoid the

development of atelectasis. More recently, airway pressure release
ventilation modes of ventilation have been utilized to preserve lung
function and minimize barotrauma from prolonged ventilation.
■ PROCUREMENT OPERATION
Prior to incision, a thorough bronchoscopic evaluation is completed.
The anatomy of the donor airways is defined. Any secretions that
may be present are evacuated and the airways are examined to rule
out the presence of any lesions or masses. The epithelial lining is
inspected for evidence of excessive friability and hemorrhage, which
may indicate significant infection. A median sternotomy incision is
employed to access the chest for lung procurement. The pleural
spaces are opened and both lungs are inspected, palpated, and
gently recruited to evaluate for suspicious nodules, consolidation,
and/or pulmonary infarction.
The donor is systemically heparinized, and the main pulmonary
artery is cannulated. Fifteen minutes prior to initiation of the explant,
prostacyclin is introduced into the main pulmonary artery and
allowed to circulate through the lungs. This vasoreactive prostanoid
helps to ensure adequate pulmonary flush by dilating the pulmonary
vasculature. The heart is arrested first, then the pulmonoplegia
solution is instilled into the lungs at a low controlled pressure. Topical
iced-saline solution is instilled into both pleural spaces. After the
heart has been explanted, the individual pulmonic veins are flushed
retrogradely. The lungs are then re-expanded, the trachea is
clamped, and the explanted allograft is stored in ice-cold saline
solution for transport. If the right and left lungs are being procured for
different recipients, the posterior left atrium, the main pulmonary
artery, and the left main-stem bronchus are divided to separate the
right and left lungs, and the organs are stored and shipped
separately.
■ RECIPIENT OPERATION AND EARLY POSTTRANSPLANT
CONSIDERATIONS
Recipient Operation The recipient operation can be divided into two
parts. The first part involves the explant of the native lung and the

second part involves the implant of the new lung. There are
generally three main surgical approaches to the completion of the
operation: a right or left thoracotomy, a transverse
thoracosternotomy (clamshell), or median sternotomy. These
approaches are all favored by various centers for different benefits.
The thoracotomy approach allows for explant and implant of donor
lungs without the use of cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) and is often
the preferred approach for single-lung transplant. The clamshell
incision offers the advantages of increased exposure compared to
either thoracotomy or median sternotomy but comes at the cost of
greater morbidity and postoperative wound complications. This
incision can be used to perform bilateral lung transplants and allows
for the possibility of avoiding CPB. A median sternotomy approach
can be used to perform bilateral lung transplant. This approach
offers the advantage of fewer wound complications, less
postoperative pain, and flexibility with more complex or concomitant
cardiac procedures at the time of lung transplant. This approach
mandates the use of CPB. The routine use of CPB allows for early
pneumonectomies without hemodynamic compromise and can
significantly reduce the ischemic time to the second allograft.
Additionally, overcirculation to the first allograft can be minimized
with the routine use of CPB. Others prefer to avoid CPB as
avoidance may be associated with decreased need for blood product
administration and lower incidence of primary graft dysfunction.
Anesthetic monitoring for lung transplant should include arterial
pressure monitoring, pulse oximetry, continuous electrocardiographic
monitoring, temperature monitoring, and urine output monitoring.
Large-bore IV access and central venous access are vital to manage
the patient safely. On a selective basis, pulmonary artery pressure
monitoring and transesophageal echocardiographic monitoring may
be useful. For patients without the planned use of CPB, doublelumen endotracheal tubes are mandatory, whereas they can be
avoided for patients transplanted on CPB.
Once access to the thorax has been completed, the hilar
structures are isolated and divided. The bronchial anastomosis is
completed first, and the anastomosis is checked to ensure that it is
secure by insufflating the lung gently while keeping the anastomosis

under saline solution to observe for bubbles. The donor left atrial cuff
incorporating the pulmonary vein is connected to the native left
atrium and the donor right or left pulmonary artery is connected to
the native pulmonary artery. After completion of the vascular
anastomoses, the lungs are gently reperfused. During this early
reperfusion period, lung-protective ventilation strategies are
employed and oxygen tension is reduced. The patient is transitioned
to normal ventilation, drains are placed in the thoracic cavity, and the
wounds are closed.
Induction of Immunosuppression Initiation of immunosuppression
starts with induction of the patient under general anesthesia. Many
programs utilize an induction agent (most commonly an IL-2
receptor/CD25 antagonist, but antithymocyte globulin, anti-CD52
monoclonal antibodies, or other induction agents may also be used),
and systemic corticosteroids and purine modulators are administered
after induction is complete. If an IL2 receptor antagonist is utilized for
induction, a second dose is administered 4 days after the original
dose. An additional dose of methylprednisolone is administered after
allograft reperfusion in the operating room. Three-drug immune
suppression is initiated with a calcineurin inhibitor, purine modulator,
and continued systemic corticosteroids. In patients with severe acute
renal dysfunction, calcineurin inhibitor initiation may be delayed.
Perioperative Considerations and Complications Early morbidity
and mortality after lung transplant most commonly are sequelae of
primary graft dysfunction or infection. Very rarely, hyperacute
rejection has been observed; however, with the implementation of
robust systems to ensure ABO and HLA compatibility at the time of
transplant, the occurrence of hyperacute rejection is extremely
uncommon. Primary graft dysfunction (PGD) encompasses a
constellation of findings that result in poor early graft function after
transplant. This phenomenon is often the consequence of ischemiareperfusion injury in the allograft and is not related to infection or
rejection. It is characterized by a diffuse pattern of infiltrates on the
chest x-ray and poor pulmonary gas exchange with PaO2:FiO2 ratios
<300, with severe PGD characterized by diffuse severe infiltrates

and a P:F ratio of <100 at 72 h posttransplant. Most cases of PGD
are mild and self-limiting, resolving with supportive care. However, if
the PGD is severe and worsening despite maximal medical therapy,
diuresis, inotropic therapy, maximal ventilation support, and paralysis
of the patient, mechanical circulatory support with ECMO can
become necessary. The incidence of severe PGD has been steady
over the past two decades at approximately 10–15% in most
programs.
Bacterial, viral, and fungal infections are leading causes of
morbidity and mortality in lung transplantation. The lung is one of the
few solid organs that is in continuous contact with the environment.
Each breath has the potential to introduce new organisms, and the
reduced lymphatic function and mucociliary clearance in the
transplanted lung increase the risk of serious infection. The highest
incidence of infection is early after lung transplant and coincides with
the intensity of immune suppression. Early infections, occurring
within the first month after transplantation, are commonly bacterial
(especially gram-negative bacilli) and manifest as pneumonia,
mediastinitis, urinary tract infections, catheter sepsis, and skin
infections. Patients can develop pathogenic infections with
organisms associated with pretransplant colonization, and
perioperative antibiotic regimens are often deployed to address this.
Viral infections, and CMV infections, in particular, can lead to severe
recipient disease and early loss of graft and life. The majority of
transplant programs employ antiviral prophylaxis in the early
transplant period to avoid such complications. Invasive fungal
infections peak in frequency between 10 days and 2 months after
transplantation. Fungal prophylaxis regimens in the early
posttransplant period vary widely. Treatment consists of inhaled
amphotericin B in the setting of airway infection and/or azole therapy
with more advanced or invasive disease. The institution of
prophylaxis with oral trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (or inhalational
pentamidine for sulfa-allergic patients) has effectively prevented
Pneumocystis pneumonia. The risk of Pneumocystis infection is
highest during the first year after transplant. However, as infections
can also occur late after transplant, most centers recommend
prophylactic therapy be continued for life.

■ LONG-TERM MANAGEMENT OF LUNG TRANSPLANT
RECIPIENTS
While survival after lung transplantation continues to improve by era,
the survival rates in this group are lower than in other solid-organ
cohorts. Approximately 50% of lung transplant recipients will
experience at least one episode of acute rejection in the first
posttransplant year, and by 5 years posttransplant, approximately
half will have developed chronic rejection. As a result, posttransplant
immune suppression regimens may be more aggressive than in
other solid-organ recipients, as described above. The
immunosuppressive regimen must be balanced against the potential
toxicities that accrue with these medications over time.
Acute cellular rejection in lung transplant recipients is most
common in the first posttransplant year, with a decreased but not
absent frequency thereafter. Infections can stimulate cellular
rejection, most clearly demonstrated in the setting of CMV infection,
but also noted after other infections. Most programs incorporate a
schedule of routine surveillance bronchoscopy to assess for acute
cellular rejection posttransplant. Acute cellular rejection manifests as
a lymphocytic infiltrate involving the distal small vessels and
capillaries and/or a lymphocytic bronchiolitis involving the distal
airways of the lung. Acute cellular rejection, a risk factor for the
development of chronic lung allograft dysfunction (CLAD), is treated
with augmented immune suppression. Antibody-mediated rejection
in its classic form is a neutrophilic vasculitis associated with the
small vessels and capillaries of the lung, with associated deposition
of by-products of the complement cascade, in the setting of allograft
dysfunction and circulating donor-specific HLA antibodies in the
blood. The manifestations of antibody-mediated rejection in the lung
allograft are less specific than in other organs. Further research is
ongoing into the diagnostic and treatment considerations of this
entity in lung transplantation.
CLAD is an overarching description of the syndrome of long-term
allograft rejection. The classic manifestation of CLAD is obliterative
bronchiolitis, the development of fibrinous material within the distal
airways that leads to small-airways obstruction. As transbronchial
biopsies are insensitive for diagnosing obliterative bronchiolitis, a

clinical diagnostic designation of bronchiolitis obliterans syndrome
can be made when specific PFT criteria are met and other causes of
PFT decline are excluded. CLAD can also present as a restrictive
phenotype, with imaging demonstrating upper lobe–predominant
pleural thickening, small lung volumes, and interstitial changes on
high-resolution CT. Numerous therapies for CLAD have been
utilized, including azithromycin, montelukast, extracorporeal
photopheresis, alemtuzumab, and others, with varying degrees of
success.
Infection is a significant complication of lung transplantation, with
persistent risk over the lifetime of the transplant recipient. As time
progresses, the chance of opportunistic infection increases. The risk
of bacterial infection and fungal infection remains, and can affect the
lung parenchyma, airways and anastomotic sites, and other organs.
Viral infections such as CMV reactivation and infection, EBVassociated posttransplant lymphoproliferative disease, and other
rarer infections can also develop in the later posttransplant setting as
well.
Numerous longer-term medical complications can be seen in lung
transplant recipients. Essential hypertension, diabetes mellitus,
chronic renal insufficiency, and bone loss are some examples of
chronic medical conditions observed following transplantation. A
multidisciplinary approach to care that involves the patient’s primary
care physician, local pulmonologist, and appropriate subspecialists,
along with transplant pharmacy, as well as social work and care
coordination, is beneficial in addressing the complex needs of lung
transplant recipients over time. Predictors of short- and long-term
outcomes after lung transplantation are outlined in Table 298-3.

299 Interventional Pulmonary Medicine Lonny Yarmus, David Feller-Kopman
Interventional pulmonary medicine is a subspecialty of pulmonary
and critical care medicine focusing on the evaluation and
management of patients with thoracic malignancy, central airway
obstruction, pleural disease, and advanced obstructive lung disease
such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)/emphysema
and asthma. Novel minimally invasive interventions have drastically
changed the way we care for patients. In this chapter, we will
summarize recent developments and evolving technologies in
interventional pulmonology (IP).

DIAGNOSTIC BRONCHOSCOPY
With the introduction of the rigid bronchoscope by Gustav Killian in
1897, the mortality associated with foreign-body aspiration dropped
from over 90% to less than 5%, as patients no longer had to suffer
from airway obstruction and postobstructive pneumonia. Shigeto
Ikeda developed the flexible bronchoscope in 1967, allowing access
to the peripheral airways and lung parenchyma. Bronchoscopy has
remained an important diagnostic and therapeutic procedure, and
recent technology has significantly increased its utility.
■ Endobronchial Ultrasound
The diagnosis and staging of lung cancer remains one of the most
important roles of advanced diagnostic bronchoscopy and IP.
Convex endobronchial ultrasound (cEBUS) is a flexible
bronchoscope combined with ultrasound technology that allows for
real-time visualization during transbronchial needle aspiration
(TBNA) of mediastinal and hilar lymph nodes and masses adjacent
to the airways (Fig. 299-1).

With a sensitivity of 90% and a specificity of 100%, cEBUS has
become the gold standard for lung cancer staging and can provide
sufficient tissue to perform molecular profiling to guide targeted
therapies in lung cancer with adequacy rates for testing that exceed
95%. cEBUS is also extremely helpful in diagnosing mediastinal and
hilar adenopathy due to sarcoidosis and lymphoma.
■ Peripheral Bronchoscopy
Evaluations of pulmonary nodules and lung masses are frequent
indications for bronchoscopy as a way to achieve a minimally
invasive diagnosis. Historically, the diagnostic yield of bronchoscopy

to target peripheral pulmonary lesions was approximately <60%. To
improve on targeting success, multiple guidance platforms allow for
more distal improved access in the periphery of the lung.
Smaller bronchoscopes that are <4 mm in diameter can be
combined with available imaging tools to improve target localization.
Radial-probe endobronchial ultrasound utilizes a radial scanning
ultrasound probe that is inserted through the bronchoscope and into
the lung, producing a real-time image of the target lesion.
Electromagnetic navigation bronchoscopy (ENB) involves imageguidance systems that manipulate thin-slice CT images to create
virtual airway reconstructions used as guided maps during
bronchoscopy. Robotic-assisted bronchoscopic platforms offer the
enhanced articulation and stability of a robotic arm replacing the
traditional flexible bronchoscope. Additional studies are currently
underway to explore further the utility of these systems for peripheral
lesion biopsy.

THERAPEUTIC BRONCHOSCOPY
Therapeutic bronchoscopy is indicated for the relief of malignant and
nonmalignant central airway obstruction, asthma, and emphysema.
Active research is also focusing on the utility of bronchoscopy for the
ablation of early-stage lung cancer, as well as the treatment of
chronic bronchitis.
■ Central Airway Obstruction
Central airway obstruction (CAO) describes obstruction of the
trachea, main stem bronchi, bronchus intermedius, and/or lobar
bronchi, and can present as intrinsic (endoluminal), extrinsic
(extraluminal), or mixed (extraluminal tumor resulting in mass effect
and endoluminal involvement) (Fig. 299-2). The differential diagnosis
of CAO is shown in Table 299-1.
TABLE 299-1 Differential Diagnosis of Central Airway
Obstruction

Patients often initially present with cough and exertional dyspnea,
but then progress with increasing severity of obstruction to dyspnea
at rest, stridor, and respiratory failure. Patients may also have
wheezing, hemoptysis, or symptoms of postobstructive infection.
Rigid bronchoscopy is the preferred tool to manage CAO in
conjunction with ablative therapies, balloon bronchoplasty, and
airway stenting to offer rapid symptomatic relief with immediate
reductions in the level of required care. Therapeutic bronchoscopy
for CAO has been shown to improve significantly both quality of life
and survival.
■ Ablative Therapies for CAO
Ablative therapy in the airway consists of both heat (laser,
electrocautery, and argon plasma coagulation) and cold
(cryotherapy) modalities. These techniques are most commonly
used to destroy tumor and provide hemostasis. The cryoprobe can
also be used for foreign-body removal. Other modalities, such as
brachytherapy (BRT) and photodynamic therapy (PDT), have a
delayed therapeutic effect and are often not suitable for situations
where immediate relief of airway obstruction is desired.
■ Bronchoplasty

Bronchoplasty (or bronchial dilation) can be achieved with the barrel
of the rigid bronchoscope or with balloons that can be passed via the
rigid or flexible bronchoscope. Bronchoplasty is most commonly
used for dilation of stenotic airways or disruption of webs related to
nonmalignant causes of airway diseases. Although dilation generally
leads to immediate relief of the stenosis, results can be short-lived
and, hence, this technique is often combined with airway stenting.
Complications are rare but can include airway tears if proper
techniques are not followed.
■ Airway Stenting
After airway patency is achieved, airway stents can be utilized to
prevent recurrence of CAO. Reports of endoscopically implantable
stents for the airways date back to 1914. Airway stents are
commonly used to treat patients with CAO due to extrinsic
compression from a variety of malignant and nonmalignant
disorders. Stents are effective and lead to symptomatic relief in
>90% of patients. A variety of airway stents are available, each with
its own benefits and detriments; it is important to choose the right
stent for the specific indication. Stent complications are not
uncommon and include mucostasis, infection, and the development
of granulation tissue. First-generation biodegradable stents, custom
3-dimensional-printed stents, and drug-coated stents are currently
being evaluated, working toward a personalized medicine approach
wherein stents are tailored to an individual’s airway anatomy and
underlying disease.
■ Endobronchial Intratumoral Chemotherapy
Endobronchial intratumoral chemotherapy (EITC) is an intervention
aimed at improving and/or maintaining airway patency in patients
with malignant CAO, with the potential to eliminate the need for
airway stenting and its associated complications. Under
bronchoscopic guidance, high-dose therapeutics can be injected
directly into tumor to enhance response and limit systemic side
effects. Most recently, a novel microneedle injection catheter has
been used to optimize drug delivery of paclitaxel, and was shown to

be both feasible and safe with no restenosis. Additional studies are
needed to assess the long-term effects of EITC.
■ Ablative Therapies for Early-Stage Lung Cancer
Bronchoscopic ablation of early-stage lung cancer has long been
described as the “holy grail” of bronchoscopy due to the appeal of
staging, diagnosing, and treating biopsy-proven early-stage lung
cancer in one procedural setting. There is limited experience with
bronchoscopic radiofrequency ablation (B-RFA) and microwave
ablation (MWA) as a potential means to treat early-stage lung
cancer. Ultimately, the efficacy of bronchoscopic ablation of earlystage nonoperable lung cancer must be proven in longitudinal
studies demonstrating noninferiority in survival as compared to the
current gold standard of stereotactic body radiation (SBRT).
■ Bronchoscopic Therapies for Asthma
Bronchial thermoplasty (BT) is a treatment for patients with severe
persistent asthma who remain symptomatic despite maximal medical
treatment that delivers radiofrequency energy to the airways to
reduce their smooth muscle mass. A pivotal randomized clinical trial
did not show a change in FEV1 or airway hyperresponsiveness, but
was able to demonstrate an improvement in quality of life and
reduction in exacerbation rates, visits to the emergency department,
and days lost from school or work. At this time, the ideal asthma
phenotypes and ideal candidates for this treatment modality remain
to be determined.
■ Bronchoscopic Therapies for Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary
Disease
The National Emphysema Treatment Trial (NETT), published in
2003, demonstrated that lung volume reduction (LVR) surgery for
severe emphysema confers improved survival and exercise capacity
in patients with upper lobe–predominant disease and poor exercise
capacity. At the same time, it showed high perioperative morbidity
and mortality. During the last decade, several bronchoscopic
therapeutic modalities have been tested, including valves, coils,

steam, stents, and foam, in patients with severe emphysema to
mimic the physiologic effects of surgical lung volume reduction
(SLVR) in a less invasive fashion.
■ Bronchoscopic Lung Volume Reduction
Bronchoscopic lung volume reduction (BLVR) via valve placement
involves placement of one-way valves in airways leading to areas of
the lung with significant emphysema, allowing air and mucus to exit
but blocking air entry to achieve lobar collapse. Several clinical trials
on BLVR with valves have demonstrated improvements in lung
function and overall improvement in quality of life and exercise
tolerance. The overall safety profile of these valve systems
compares favorably with surgical LVR with a much lower rate of
perioperative morbidity and mortality.
■ Targeted Lung Denervation
Targeted lung denervation is a novel therapy that involves
bronchoscopic ablation of peribronchial parasympathetic nerves in
order to achieve permanent bronchodilation. Unlike bronchoscopic
LVR, which focuses exclusively on patients with emphysema,
targeted lung denervation is potentially applicable more broadly to all
COPD patients, with studies showing a reduction in pulmonary
exacerbations when compared with a sham denervated group.
■ Pleural Interventions
Thoracic ultrasound has become invaluable in the evaluation of
patients with pleural effusion and pneumothorax. Medical
thoracoscopy (also called pleuroscopy) is a minimally invasive
technique most commonly used to evaluate recurrent exudative
pleural effusions, and is associated with a diagnostic yield of >95%.
Indwelling pleural catheters (IPCs) have gained tremendous
popularity and have been declared by evidence-based guidelines to
be as acceptable as chemical pleurodesis for the management of
symptomatic malignant pleural effusions. When comparing IPC and
pleurodesis via talc slurry, two multicentered, open-label,
randomized controlled trials demonstrated IPC effectively relieved

dyspnea, decreased the duration of hospital stay, and lessened the
need for future procedures.
Pleural infection (empyema or complex parapneumonic effusion)
is commonly encountered in clinical practice. The mainstay of
therapy typically consisted of antibiotics, drainage of the infected
pleural space with tube thoracostomy, and possible need for surgical
decortication. The landmark Multicenter Intrapleural Sepsis Trial
(MIST2) demonstrated that intrapleural sequential administration of
rTPA and DNase resulted in significant radiographic and clinical
improvements and allowed >90% of patients to avoid surgery.
■ Pneumothorax and Persistent Air Leak
Persistent air leak is defined as a nonresolving pneumothorax with
an air leak lasting more than 5–7 days. For over a decade, the U.S.
Food and Drug Administration has maintained a humanitarian device
exemption for compassionate use of the Spiration Valve System for
management of persistent air leak following lobectomy,
segmentectomy, or LVR surgery, although the device has also been
used “off label” for the treatment of persistent air leak due to primary
and secondary spontaneous pneumothoraces.

Summary
IP provides diagnostic and therapeutic options that span the
spectrum of benign and malignant airway and pleural disorders. The
constant innovations in diagnostic and treatment modalities have
continued to help push the boundaries of pulmonary medicine.



